19.2 Meanwhile, Chen received news from his colleagues in San Francisco. Student and union agreements to end the strike at the college in 1969 were in fact never signed by the president, nor the board of trustees; demands were never met, agreements were never enacted. Students were punished. Professors denied tenure. The trustees failed to protect academic freedom, and the California Senate drafted over one hundred bills to suppress campus dissent. But, they wrote, flowers are blooming on campus—daisies and petunias and marigolds. ..
19.3 Chen returned to San Francisco, but not before standing on the hill of le Cimetiere de Marin and penning a final postcard to Paul: "Some have the merit of seeing clearly what all others see confusedly. Some have the merit of glimpsing confusedly what no one sees as yet. A combination of these gifts is exceptional." Paul Valery. But who among us is exceptional?
xx
Old man, how is it that you hear these things? Young man, how is it that you do not?
—Kwai Chang Caine and Master Po
20.1 When Chen returned, he opened his long-closed and dusty garage, took the Siata 2o8s Spider coupe off its blocks, and bought new wheels for it. He made Paul, who had nothing better to do, drive it back and forth to the mechanic, replacing, testing, and cleaning parts, and polish its red body to a high luster. He had met his second wife at the Grand Prix in Monte Carlo; she was a race car enthusiast, and this was her car.
20.2 He said, "Listen to the soft purr of that engine. Can you hear it? That's the Fiat 2-liter v8. Crafted in Geneva in 1952. Nica took the prize with this at the Targa Florio in 1957." Paul and Edmund looked skeptical. When had their teacher become a mechanic? "Now listen to this." He revved it up. What else does one do with a race car? One races it.
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
My Special Island
Okinawa is vital for the security of the u.s.
Korea is vital for the security of the u.s.
Indochina is vital for the security of the u.s.
The Philippines are vital for the security of the u.s.
Taiwan is vital for the security of the u.s.
The Tiao Yu Tai islands are vital for the security of the u.s.
Tiao Yu Tai?
Two Days after the Lunar New Year of the Pig (Boar)...
Now don't get Maoist with me. You know I'm not a proselytizing kind of girl. Look who you're fooling with. Do I look like I'll do time with a naked face and/or nails? Not that I couldn't, but girls like me don't get starring roles in The Good Earth. There might be days I could do pigtails, and if you put beads and brocade on that Mao jacket, it might go over something more evocative. A red silk cheongsam slit to the hip, for goodness sake. I could substitute my bangles for some red star earrings. I'll tell you one thing: I could go for the beret a la Che look. I would wear that man stretched over my bosom any day. Now, honey, would that arouse you?
Now, you know where you should be. You should be out there with your friend in Saint Mary's Square next to Sun Yat-sen, protesting with five hundred others over the Tiao Yu Tai. It's quite a crowd. All riled up good and Chinese-like. And there's Father Sun presiding, looking all sun-reflective, proof that the Chinese padred California too. But no, instead here you are, humping with me in a pathetic little room in the I-Hotel. Oh no you don't. Don't come yet. I'm not finished with you.
Did you read their manifesto? What manifesto? The Tiao Yu Tai manifesto, of course. But who nowadays doesn't have a manifesto? Even I have a manifesto. But as a good Oriental citizen, I'm all for their manifesto. Think about those beautiful little islands out there in the middle of nowhere, just waiting to be grabbed up like Hawaii. Wild flowers. Flying fish.
I HOTEL
Green and verdant. Just thinking about them makes me go paradisiac. But I hyperventilate. The Japanese and the American military need to keep their pesky hands off those islands. If anyone knows what to do with an island, it's the Chinese. What? Oh well, overpopulate it, I suppose. Fill it up with all those number-one sons, sail them out on picturesque junks, come home to honey with a big catch, and make a lot of babies. Turn it into one big happy i-land commune.
AN INTERNATIONAL CONSPIRACY!
U.S. government succumbs to Japanese secret demands and agrees to deliver the oil-rich Tiao Yu Tai islands to Japan. The Tiao Yu Tai islands, 20 miles north of Taiwan and 240 miles south of Ryukyu, are rightfully Chinese. Chinese fishermen have used these territorial waters for centuries. The recent discovery of rich oil deposits around the islands—almost twice the deposits of California—is too attractive to the Japanese militarists. The Sato regime has secretly demanded that the islands be included in the Ryukyu group and be returned to Japan in 1972. The U.S. had yielded to Japanese demands and had agreed to return the islands to Japan without the consent of the Chinese people. Our Chinese people strongly protest this Tokyo- Washington plot and tell the world you may forget Pearl Harbor, but we will never give away Tiao Yu Tai.
Chinese Six Companies San Francisco, California
I'm here today representing the Japanese Community Youth Council, and we Japanese in America condemn the government of Japan for this act of international robbery against other Asian people. Just as we condemn the American government for its criminal acts in Southeast Asia, we condemn the Japanese militarist government of blatant pig acts against the Tiao Yu Tai islands. This pig activity, whether in the oilfields of these islands or the rice fields of Vietnam, this pig activity is called imperialism. Down with Japanese imperialism! Down with KMT traitors! Down with U.S. imperialism! All power to the people!
A revolutionary
Federal Building
January 29, 1971
Around noontime on April 9 ...
I saw Ike and Tina Turner the other night at the Fillmore. Tina worked the mike, you know what I mean? She worked it, like it was her object. She tongued the machine. I was there, right there in the front watching her try to wrap her body around and get into that thing. Right, disgusting. By now you'd think it would be a cliche, the mike thing, but it's the music that gets into your system. So we're gonna pump those speakers into the floor. Take your shoes off. Now feel that. Oye Como Va. The floorboards are vibrating like they got a pulse.
Old Chinese guy below is probably deaf, don't you know. But he's not there anyway. He got his old Chinese brothers together to march around Portsmouth Square with Edmund and the others. Want to imagine it on KPFA? Come on. Stretch yourself out, and feel it happening like we're there. Let's do some island lovin'. Oh, we're in luck. It's Arthur Ma reporting. Listen. They're singing the Tiao Yu Tai song in Portsmouth Square.
Arthur Ma: About fifty demonstrators, mostly students from China going to school here, are gathered today in Portsmouth Square in Chinatown to protest the U.S. and Japanese takeover of the Tiao Yu Tai islands. They have been making their speeches in Cantonese, and the student organizers of the rally urge their supporters to keep up the pressure against the oil grab of these islands. The students are showing their support by putting up their fists in power signs.
Down with Japanese militarism! Down with U.S. imperialism! Down with the KMT sellouts!
Ma continues: Now you notice in the park, there are the usual Chinese elderly folk sitting around playing checkers, reading the paper, and sunning themselves, but with these excellent speeches, some of them have begun to perk up and take notice. You can see their shy smiles and quiet claps of appreciation and approval. The speaker is saying: "Chinese must have pride and not allow foreign governments to step all over us and then allow the Chiang Kai-shek government to do nothing! It's because of this that our Chinese people have had to leave China. "Now they are standing up and clapping. What the—? Who are these guys?
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
53
Who are these guys? The Wah Ching of course, hired by the KMT sellouts come to beat up the Communists. What did that ruffian yell? Death to the Communist traitors! Oh, it's kung fu time. Oh baby, come get me like a Water Margin outlaw. Just rough me up a bit. Oh yes.
Ma: Eight guys dressed up in black have just rushed onto the stage! They re attacking the speakers and throwing around the sound equipment!
Oh, the commotion! But check this out honey, the Chinese elders from the park are rushing to the stage! Oh, that's gotta be my old man downstairs. Spinning around with kung fu kicks and punches! Truth is, only real men with experience can fight like this. It's like a kung fu motion picture! Baby KMT gangsters are just no match. They're scattering like black mice. There now. There's our interlude. The rally can go on. Oh, but can you hear it now? Oh baby, it's the Tiao Yu Tai song! Nothing moves me like island patriotism.
Student speaker: We will march as planned! We will not be intimidated! Follow the monitors in black armbands. First we will march to the KMT Chinese Consulate. Then to the Japanese Consulate. And then we will march to the Federal Building! Follow us!
Hey hey hey! U.S.A! Stay away! From Tiao Yu Tai!
Ma: This is Arthur Ma for KPFA signing off at one thirty p.m. from Portsmouth Square in Chinatown on April 9,
The Ping Heard Round the World
On April 70, nine ping-pong players, four officials, and two spouses stepped across a bridge from Hong Kong to the Chinese mainland, ushering in an era of "Ping-Pong diplomacy." They were the first group of Americans allowed into China since the Communist takeover in 1949.
54
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
On the Anniversary of the May 4 Chinese Student Movement . . .
I'm just like that little Mowgli feral child in the Jungle Book. Can you believe I cried when I saw that cartoon? That was me: a little Asian girl raised among drag queens. Now, they've dropped me off in the forbidden city to hide my sorry ass. But who in Chinatown isn't facing the same circumstances? Look at you. We were all left here in the tribal village to fend for ourselves. Honey, pass me that pipe. I've got some forgetting to do.
Edmund's going to have to make some choices. Five hundred academic sinologists can sign off on a letter, tell Taiwan what for and so on about how to run its business, but in the end, what does it mean? You can't stir up a pot with five hundred sinologists. Honey, you need five million sinologists.
My old man downstairs explained it all to me. He was right there on the very day at the birth of the revolution. He told me that he arose a new man on that day. But I'm confused. May 4 is the birth of the revolution, but which revolution? The one for Sun Yat-sen, for Chiang Kai-shek, or for Mao Tse-tung?
The land of China can be conquered but not ceded; the people of China can be slaughtered but not bent. The nation is falling! Fellow men, rise!
Luo Jialun
Tiananmen Square, May 4,1919
Overseas Chinese will never forget the motherland!
Well, you should know more than I. Your dear professor friend is always advising Edmund, isn't he? He's the one who suggested tying the island protest to the May 4 Chinese student movement. I'm with RG, Mr. Red Guard himself, who said who gives a shit what happened in China over fifty years ago, but obviously Professor Chen knows how history works on people's psyches. If people see history repeating itself, they get all nostalgic and riled up. I know. I was there, sitting next to Edmund in that same movie.
You know those movies. They're showing them every weekend downstairs at the Asian Community Center, like entertainment for the old folks, to give them a peek of the homeland. You see maybe millions of
I HOTEL
55
Chinese in black-and-white, standing room only, in that square in Peking that looks likes it's a mile wide, red flags flapping around everywhere. They're going crazy. Now that's a rally! What's a mere one-fifty at Portsmouth Square, or even five hundred at Saint Mary's? All right, I agree. Each of those five hundred represents five hundred more. At least Chinese know how to count.
Edmund's over at Portsmouth Square again, rallying the folks. They're all making speeches in Chinese about the anniversary of the May 4 student movement. But notice that the Red Guard is doing security backstage with their Mao caps and shades, packing loaded revolvers behind their flack jackets. No one's taking any chances this time. No eight KMT gangsters dressed in black are going to disrupt this session. They've got Red Guards posted on the roofs above the square with loaded rifles. Wah Ching could only arrive to a bloody surprise. The Tiao Yu Tai college types are making their speeches in Cantonese, with translations in English for the ABC. Please be patient, darling.
ABC:
MIT:
HIP:
FOB:
KMT:
ROC:
PRC:
American-Born Chinese
Made in Taiwan
Hong Kong Instant Product
Fresh Off the Boat
Kuomingtang
Republic of China (Taiwan)
People's Republic of China (mainland China)
MTTT:   Mao Tse-tung Thought
O.K., now they're finished with their history lesson.
Here comes the ABC Red Guard with their flamboyant red flags, blasting "East is Red." RG struts his thing to the podium and makes his speech: We of the Red Guard salute you in the Year of the People Off the Pig!
(chanting) People Off the Pig! People Off the Pig!
Let it be known today, May 4 in the Year of the People Off the Pig, that we, the Red Guard, claim the territory of Portsmouth Square in the name of The People and henceforth rename it Tiao Yu Tai Park!
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
China in the News in
July is
After Secretary of State Henry Kissinger's secret mission to Peking, President Nixon announces he will visit China.
September
Lin Piao, understood to have been Mao Tse-tung's successor, is killed in an airplane crash in Mongolia. The official explanation is that he had been involved in a failed plot to kill Mao and was killed fleeing to the Soviet Union.
October 25
Resolution 2758 is passed by the General Assembly of the United Nations, withdrawing recognition of the ROC as the legitimate government of China, and recognizing the PRC as the sole legitimate government of China.
But, darling, as I was saying about the movies: I'm sitting next to Edmund in the dark with those millions of black-and-white Chinese flickering off our faces, and they say: THE CHINESE PEOPLE HAVE STOOD UP! And Edmund, he's wiping his tears away. O.K., I admit it: I cried too. I cried, and I'm not really Chinese. When it comes to solidarity, I'm solidarity all the way.
So right now, Edmund and his comrades are marching over to the Taiwan—or was it the Formosa?—Consulate to deliver their manifesto. Oh excuse me. The Republic of China Consulate. Listen, if you ask Edmund, he'll tell you that this is not an issue of supporting one government or another. It's not about long live Chiang or Mao. This is about the sovereignty of the Chinese people, period. You and I could be there now with the masses, yelling. The Chinese people have stood up! The Chinese people have stood up! Oh, rub me there, baby. Right there. It's time now, baby. Oh yes. The Chinese people have stood up! The Chinese people have stood up! THE CHINESE PEOPLE HAVE STOOD UP!
I HOTEL
57
