^: We
When we arrived, there was no Golden Gate, no Statue of Liberty. Even so, some shouted: America! America! And we floated into the bay like the fog at twilight. If we got here earlier than the great earthquake and fire, our first impressions of our golden city were on the Barbary Coast—loose men and women of the vintage Gay Nineties carousing in dance halls and bars, around and about in horse-drawn buggies, speculating on a future and fortunes made from California gold. If we arrived after the fires, some of us might have noticed the island of Alcatraz but were forced to dock at another prison island, the one called Angel.
In those early years, the bay's geography was traversed by ferries, fanning out from the city's great transportation hub: the Ferry Building. We ourselves fanned out across the peninsulas, congregating in cities segregated by covenants, in farmlands confined by land laws and leasing contracts, on coastal waters in small fishing boats. We worked as houseboys, cooks, pickers and stoop labor, gardeners, fishermen, and canners. We opened shops: groceries, dry goods, tailoring, restaurants, flower shops, drug stores with soda fountains. We ran boarding houses and hotels, churches, temples, newspapers, health clinics, language schools, YMCAS and YWCAS, and kenjinkais. We gave our adopted towns names like Li'1 Yokohama and Nihonmachi.
By the third decade of the century, our children witnessed the great engineering feats and the openings of the stately Golden Gate and Bay bridges. Cable cars and automobiles replaced horses and ferryboats. We sent our children to school and college, only to see them return home jobless. Those were the days when you'd meet a fella with an engineering degree selling fruit on the corner. Everything changed with the bombing of Pearl Harbor. We were forced to leave our li'l towns and farming and fishing communities and were herded en mass to desert camps surrounded by barbed wire and gun towers. We looked like the enemy, but that's not the same as being the enemy.
At war's end, those of us who survived came back to our golden city and our little towns, took up our old jobs or started new ones. We rebuilt
58	KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
our old communities and started new families. Our youngsters turned into the third generation, what we call the sansei, and that's about the time when this story begins.
Who's to say what love is or how it starts inside each person? Who's to say what triggers the feeling, the knowing that passes from one to the other? We saw the young man walk through the tattered remains of the old ferry building. Maybe it was the old building with its ghost lovers, we can't say. We could see his footfalls avoid the scraps of trash ground into grimy crevices. Maybe it was the decay of an old place. He was wearing gold alligator cowboy boots. We could see them shuffling out from his ragged bells, scuffed and shredding at the toe. We could tell that those boots were his favorite, snug in the right places, his walk confident.
He walked out into the warm-swept sunlight, the sort of day we rarely know in our foggy city. When such a day arrives, it's like a sweet summer gift, and we know that we truly live in the most beautiful city in the world. From the hills we can see the glorious expanse of the azure bay and its bridges reaching into the picturesque vistas. All the pastel Victorians winding up and down over the hills in rows, like glittering ladies with gloved hands pressed one to the other.
We saw him remove his jeans jacket and toss it jauntily over his shoulder. Beneath the jacket he was wearing a thin shirt, so thin it was threadbare. It was sepia in tone, and perhaps it was silk or some sort of nylon imitation. We could see it flutter at the sleeves but press with the wind about his body, exposing the curve along his spine and the rise in his chest above his ribcage. The sepia of the shirt reflected off his felt fedora of the same faded sepia, which he adjusted to account for the sun.
He presented his ticket and walked the gangway into the ferry. He chose a place along the starboard railing, looking out across the bay in search of his destination. His soft features shimmered off the glinting ocean.
We weren't tourists. We lived here, but taking the ferry in those days had become unusual, like the weather on this particular day. A few of us worked on the other side, and the ferry was still the most direct way to some points. But that day, we wanted to revisit old haunts that held our memories. We'd step onto Angel Island and remember our lives as we began our American journey with detention and interrogation.
I HOTEL
59
Chen was already on the ferry, seated on the top deck in his usual spot, reading a book. We knew him to be a regular on this ferry when the weather was good. Maybe our commotion bothered his reading, but when he looked up he watched the young man in his gold boots saunter across the ferry. We smiled at the mans show of casual independence, and so did Chen. The felt fedora shaded his face with a slight attitude of mystery. In that moment we sensed a longing pass from the young man, flittering like the gulls along the ferry's wake. We knew that the young man knew he was being watched by the older man. He felt that watching. Craved it. Please see me, his longing seemed to speak.
Chen stood and walked to the railing. He held his book before him. The young man saw the book in his hands before he saw Chen, but he knew it was he. Their shoulders touched. The threadbare shirt grazed the short-sleeved cotton bound to Chen's muscular biceps. "For your birthday," Chen said, proffering the book to the sea. "It's today, isn't it?"
"How did you remember? I'm twenty-one."
"We'll celebrate."
Every culture has its day of passage. We'd adopted this one because we believed in the law. We of all people knew the promise of law could be broken, but we doggedly struggled behind that faith.
The young man took the book from Chen and turned from the sea. He leaned his back into the railing with the open book. The pages flapped up in a salty gust as the ferry left the dock. We looked up into the sky with Chen as the ferry's horn announced its departure. But the young man was troubled with the wild pages of his new book.
"You've written another book."
"I translated the calligraphy and wrote the historic text. It's the work of an artist I've long admired. He died a few years ago in his nineties."
"When did you do this?"
"This year."
"You've been busy."
"So have you."
"I moved into the I-Hotel."
"Edmund told me."
"It's over. She left for Cuba."
Chen nodded. "Venceremos?"
60
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
"She was stripping to save the money."
"Viva Che."
The young man smiled. "The things we do for the revolution."
"And you? Why didn't you go too?"
"I guess I couldn't strip for the revolution."
"Ah, no?"
"I have bourgeois tendencies."
"Stripping is not?"
"The experiment failed."
We understood Chen's quizzical look, but he remained silent.
"I was the experiment, I think. She gave up. No, she got tired. I got tired."
Chen said nothing.
"It was all about pretending. I couldn't pretend all the time."
"Drugs help."
The young man turned to Chen with some astonishment, then embarrassment. He turned to the sea and felt his tears well uncontrollably.
Neither spoke for a long time. We felt the ferry press across the bay, chased by gulls.
Chen spoke first. He changed the direction of the conversation. "The work of the revolution is a life devoted to the people, that is to say, the public. It's a public life. A man's private life, one's deep interior, must at times be forgotten or sacrificed."
The young man shifted. We shifted too, wanting to avoid the weight of these words.
"Here." Chen retrieved the book offered as a gift, searched the pages. "This is one of my favorite paintings. Twin peaches in a small basket. Peaches represent long life, but as you know they are delicate, bruise easily. If the tree lives long, the fruit is ephemeral. Picked ripe from a tree, there is nothing sweeter or more succulent. Here twin peaches sit together, sweetly and exaggeratedly red in color for a lifetime." Chen reached up to touch the soft fuzz of the young man's felt fedora and tugged it down in jest.
If we felt confused, it was also the young man's turn to look with questioning, as well as sheepish, eyes.
Chen sighed. "Revolution is old, but older yet is the sentiment of this painting, of love and of poetry."
I HOTEL
6l
We studied the painting. We admired the swift brushstrokes, rapidly accomplished in a single sitting. How could such a thing seem so simple? It was a demonstration of a life of training revealed in a moment. It was unlike the Western oil painter's painstaking labor of color and light and perspective revealed over many years.
Chen continued, "I don't have an answer except for the experiment, as you say, of my own life. If it's your own experiment, how can it fail?"
The young man looked up.
"A long life might be many lives, many ephemeral lives within one life."
The ferry chugged into its slip, and we ambled onto Angel Island. Angel Island felt like it might be our island; so much of our history was here. But it was now a state park, and the authorities in control were friendly park rangers who directed hikers and picnickers. They had mostly forgotten the old history of the island.
The young man followed Chen, who walked quickly toward an old two-story building. A park ranger came forward to greet them. "Professor Chen? I'm Alexander Weiss."
We followed Ranger Weiss to the dilapidated building. "You'll excuse the mess. This building was a barrack. It's been used as storage. As you know, it's slated for demolition. I thought we should see what was in it before we tore it down. You never know. I didn't expect to find any treasure." He turned the key on the lock and shoved the door open. The light through it illuminated a cloud of dust, and we stepped inside.
"Watch your step. Upstairs. Over here." Weiss held a flashlight to a section of the wall.
Chen scrutinized the wall. Looking closely we saw the wood was carved away, inscribed in Chinese characters. We saw Chen's fingers delicately touch the wall. We thought he closed his eyes as if a blind man reading vivid Braille. He translated slowly:
Leaving behind my writing brush and removing my sword, I came to
America.
Who was to know two streams of tears would flow upon arriving here? If there comes a day when I will have attained my ambition and become
successful, I will certainly behead the barbarians and spare not a single blade of grass.
62
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
"A poem," said the young man.
"It's haunting," said Ranger Weiss. "I've searched the other walls. There are many others. Like cave paintings, I think. A record of each man's time here." "Plans for demolition will stop?" Chen asked.
"Yes, hopefully we can stop it. I'll have this building cleared out so you can see safely." "When?"
"In a week or two? Can you return?"
"Yes, yes!" Chen said excitedly. He stepped back to the carved wall and read the bitter, defiant poem again, this time in Chinese.
We heard the long quiet in those barracks as his recitation came to a
close, standing with three men in a jubilant circle in a dusty path of light.
We left Angel Island with Chen and his young companion. They took
the ferry on to the far side of the bay, to Tiburon, their conversation filled
with plans and possibility.
"We'll get Edmund involved. He can help with the translations." "But a poet's sensibility about language is necessary, to transmit the feeling of the poem into English. You should help with this."
We saw Chen's racy white Shelby Mustang GTO was parked conveniently at the ferry port.
"How about the Siata? How's it running?" the young man asked. "I raced the Monterey Historic last week," said Chen, gunning the engine to emphasize his boast.
"Are you angry with me for disappearing?"
We tooled with the racecar up the hills to the familiar layered pavilion that was Chen's house overlooking the bay. "I've been too busy missing you to be angry."
Chen set a table on the terrace. He placed stemmed glasses, silverware, and candles in a precise pattern on the cloth. We followed him back and forth from the kitchen. "One of my specialties," he said, fussing over a complicated sauce. "I learned it from a French chef." "Julia Child?" "How did you know?"
We didn't argue, since Chen was the sort of person who might really know Julia.
"Julias instructions are to grill duck breast rare."
I HOTEL
We stared at a photograph of a woman decked out in racing gear— gloves, goggles, and helmet—and standing next to a car. "Porsche 356 Monza. I'll never forgive Nica. She gave it to a girlfriend who one day just drove it away."
We continued to stare at the photo, trying to see the woman behind the goggles while pretending to scrutinize the car. What does a baroness look like?
"Nica was a bit older than me." Chen thought for a moment. "Our marriage was happily arranged. She and I were excellent company. I cared for her when she became ill."
He popped a bottle of champagne and nudged a glass at the young man. We looked out at the island where we had passed the day, and at the city's hills. They toasted the sunset over the bay, slipping behind the Golden Gate.
The young man knew as he had craved his knowing in sepia tones on the ferry that morning. And Chen had also known the ephemeral moment that would constitute another life in a long wish for a long life. Once again they leaned out over a railing, their shoulders touching, the soft youth of a man newly twenty-one and the toned muscularity of a scholar of many lives.
Many years later we would sing the poem penned in the morning after:
Speaking of love and the revolution across the bay.
Speaking of ferrying south, that endless intent.
The ocean is wider than the sky, your grace taller than Tamalpais.
How could spring rain turn rocky cliff into soft soil?
How could sprouts grow taller than this outlook?
Wind chimes have replaced the sound of water on the roof.
Tve been too busy missing you to be angry. Tve been too busy missing you to be angry.
64
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
6: Tofu Tigers
For those born after the liberation, it is necessary to attend speak-bitterness sessions and to listen to the old folks talk about the old days, what they suffered and how they were abused by the old system. The new generation does not know this past; they only know about the days after liberation. Chairman Mao says that the world and China's future belong to the youth, but because of their inexperience they cannot comprehend the hardships of the past and the struggle required to establish a happy socialist society. This must also be true of overseas Chinese people. Although they may confront hardships, their struggles have not yet led to socialism. Lately, many overseas Chinese citizens return to visit the motherland. They come in the spirit of pride and learning and are welcomed as compatriots and comrades. They are quickly infected with the energy and spirit of the people, and they acknowledge their industry and progress.
This return coincides with the visit last year of the American President Nixon to the People's Republic of China. This is a momentous event that signals a new era of exchange and equal standing between great nations. The People's Republic of China in a short time accomplishes the unification of the country. This is a long and arduous road for which millions of Chinese sacrifice their lives. Since May 4, 1919 the Chinese people fight bravely for three decades to expel the Japanese imperialists and defeat reactionary nationalists. This struggle is won through the leadership of the Chinese Communist Party and the revolutionary army it commands. Thirty years later on October 1, 1949, Chairman Mao stands on the rostrum of Tiananmen Square and announces a new era for the Chinese people. This is a great victory for the worker and peasant masses, who together bring about this great proletarian socialist revolution. Now in fewer than twenty-five years since the liberation, the Chinese people demonstrate their ability to change the social, political, and physical landscape of China by removing, one by one, the three big mountains of imperialism, feudalism, and bureaucrat-capitalism.
I HOTEL