1O: All the Things You Are
What thoughts I have for you tonight, for I walked down Kearny under the shadow of an invisible hotel with a piano improvisation: all the things you are. Sweet poet. Sweet lover. Monk of the Tenderloin. Master Kon-nyaku. Fillmore Pilipino priest often thousand pianos. Play a song for former lovers meeting in the howling rain.
A drenched, unshaven man disappears in a steamy cloud behind the glass of a telephone booth.
Paul?
Wen-guang? It's been a long time.
Yes. I need a favor.
Where are you? Bad connection.
It's the rain. Did you hear that? Thunder. I'm at the gas station. Bottom of the hill. You know the one?
Car trouble?
No. They've condemned my house.
What?
All this rain. The foundation is slipping. They've cordoned it off.
Shit.
I've removed your things. What you left. And there's more. Could you come? I borrowed a truck. I've been filling it up.
Shit! I heard that one.
That was close.
I'll be there.
Sitting in your teahouse made from the refuse of the demolished Fill-more, the rain is softer, drenching the hydrangea along the bamboo wall. The spirits of those old Victorians seep through the wood and curl around your tea. Some are raucous spirits, dark panels pulled from dance floors and smoky bars, titillating tunes of blues and bebop. Some are cloistered spirits set in dark hardwood cherry, hoarding precious leathered first editions. What of those books? The music and the words now silent.
no
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
Konnyaku, the three-legged, one-eyed cat, curled in a disheveled ball next to a warm teapot.
Meanwhile, the rain crashes in great waves across the Golden Gate. Cars slither precariously, headlights groping forward. Up the winding hill, two small rivers of mud and debris rush past on either side of the traffic parade. At the top of the hill, the cypress point to the ocean in the direction of the windswept storm.
A drenched man is running from his house with an armful of books.
Your stuff. It's all in the Siata. There's more. I threw in what I could. I filled the trunk, the backseat. Car's too small. It's a mess, but they didn't give me any time.
I don't need my stuff. I haven't needed it all year.
I need to tell you something.
It doesn't matter.
Your mother and I met at Stanford. She was a brilliant student of English literature.
Can't this wait? You're soaked!
We were great friends, so we got married, but I could never be faithful. We were married only a year, and she left. But we were always friends. It's really true I introduced her to your father. They were very happy together.
Why didn't you tell me before?
When your father died it didn't seem appropriate, and later, it felt very strange. I thought you would be repulsed, and you were.
I thought you might be my father.
No! That's not true! That could never be true. Is that why you left? Why didn't you tell me?
Why didn't you tell me?"
I've missed you.
It hurts, Wen-guang. It hurts badly.
Konnyaku, with a dingy spotted coat the color of konnyaku, a tail hairless in spots, a dark socket for the lost eye. That must have been some fierce fighting, screeching yowling dissonance, claws and teeth ripping and tearing. Two crazy cats in a fight to the finish. How did you come by this ugly old soldier, this war-torn survivor?
I HOTEL

The relentless rain washes across their faces, dribbles from nose to chin to chest to stomach to crotch. The clothing has to be peeled off, layer by layer, abandoned with boots in sloppy piles in the dark entry-way. Naked, shivering.
They've turned off the gas and electricity.
What did they say? Can they save the house?
Too precarious to know. They told me to leave immediately.
Immediately. Then—
You're shivering.
Get under. Hurry.
Hurry.
Whip me up some frothy tea from boiled rainwater and tell me about all the women you have ever loved, all the serenading and sweet-talking, all the tender tunes you played. Or better yet, toss a fish head in the boiling rainwater and tend the roiling pot, replay the minor keys along the spine, the major keys across the hips, the soft and frantic melodies that brush the lips. Or better yet, throw in bulbs and tubers, roots and leaves, seeds and bark, algae and fungus, and stir the moaning moaning in the pot.
It was as if the thunder of the ocean's waves engulfed the house, crested in white sheets against the windows, pounded the roof.
Wait. Listen. Hear that?
Rain. Never stops.
No. Get up.
I can feel it. Do you feel that?
Here. Put this on. Quickly.
Like a small earthquake.
Hurry! Get out!
Take the Siata. I'll follow in the truck.
Where are you going?
One last thing. I just remembered.
Forget it. We can come back later.
It's too valuable.
It's too dangerous.
112
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
You're getting wet again. Get in the car.
Fuck it! Just hurry.
I'll meet you at the bottom.
The hot pot sits between us, steam and fragrance curling up to the dark underbelly of your Fillmore roof. We fish with long chopsticks for the tender and shared sustenance. You pick out a bulb. I pick out a tuber. You pick out a root. I a leaf. You a seed. I a piece of bark. You algae. Me fungus. The fish head cools in a bowl for Konnyaku.
The Siata pulls away, its wipers flapping, wildly banging at the splatter. Headlights search the road, chasing the water to the bottom. She pulls herself around the hairpin curve, tires slipping, skimming a slick skin of water. She skids to a stop, backing away from a torrent of mud and uprooted trees. Within, she holds a small treasure and the unrequited future: a pink slip; two unfinished manuscripts, one of translated poems, songs of Gold Mountain, and another, an illustrated cookbook; a tin can of old photographs.
Light flashes a sudden blast, illuminating the falling house, but the thunder that follows is the thunder of its crashing: groan and slippage of parting concrete, shattering glass, crossbeams of weighted timber caving in on three tiered floors of gracious elegance, living room falling into library falling into studio, falling.
I HOTEL