7: 1 Am a Revolutionary
I know you're no good for me But free of you I'll never be Nowhere to run to, baby Nowhere to hide
—Martha & The Vandellas
RG and the Panther running around pulling the blankets off the beds, throwing them at the door to snuff that fire out. Flames flying off that door like it's tinder wood. When they get the flames down, RG gets some glasses of water and tosses them to cool down the egress. Outta curiosity, opens the door and checks the hallway. It's still the same empty hallway, somewhat smoked up, but no one's running out trying to save their lives. Coulda been a major disaster. Shit, coulda been the spark. But all the Moscovites tucked in and sleeping pretty.
"What're we going to say about the door?"
"Damn cigarettes. Need to quit the habit."
"Shitload of smoke in here."
"Windows don't open."
"Where's that pipe?"
"Yeah, after that, we got to relax."
Pipe lights up with its customary stink. If a fire don't arouse nobody, what's a little stink?
RG takes a drag and speculates. "Never thought I'd ever come to Russia."
"That's a fact."
"Used to think the whole world existed inside Chinatown."
"I never had that problem. Whole world was always out there." Panther grabs the air like there's bars and juts his chin forward.
RG and the Panther hold their breaths, then pause to consider how this thing—the whole world—works. How you gonna catch a thing like that in your mind? Che got on his motorcycle. Mao did his Long March. Malcolm did his hajj to Mecca. Now RG and the Panther doing it by
socialized modern transportation. In search of the Third World. Could practically fly into every Third World war zone and get a handle on the national question. What's it gonna come to? Revelation on the revolution at the end of the road.
RG walks to a window you can't pry open. Looks out on that dark sky and observes the moon over the USSR. Moon this side of the Earth should be red, but it's all the same. What about that sputnik dog circling around? What kind of dog conclusions does he come up with? How do Russian dogs say bow-wow? Or Neil Armstrong putting his big boot into the moon for mankind? Shit. They're always trying to colonize someplace. Colonize the moon, if anybody was there. Get this, same day Neil and Buzz walk the moon, Panthers're in a revolutionary conference to build a united front to combat fascism. Advocate the revolutionary struggle to abolish capitalism and introduce socialism to the USA. Stepping and leaping for mankind.
But let's get back to the storytelling about how some Chinatown street gang makes a radical turn. Back to the revolutionary war front at home. Pass the pipe, and hunker down with jet lag.
RG obliges. "So everything changes in the year of the rooster." Meaning last year, 1969. Leway brothers come to the realization that the liberal capitalist venture is jive. What's legitimate if you still get beat up by the pigs? What's legitimate if the charges are trumped up? You got nowhere to run, unless it's Vietnam. Time to stand up to the bastards. Become the defending force at home.
Come Chinese New Year, Leway contingent splits off to become the Red Guards. Set themselves up to do security for the youth festival on Waverly. Waverly's the heart of Chinatown. Every year, some white carnival comes in, closes off Waverly, and takes it over. This year, Red Guards get smart. Put out a call for every Chinatown group to put up a booth, make your own money, and keep it in Chinatown.
Red Guard security duty is serious. Brothers on watch on the roofs and off the balconies. Their commander is the minister of defense; he got his position by virtue of his size. You know Goldfinger's Oddjob? Big Oriental cat with the steel hat? Yeah, that's him. He's the biggest, bad-dest brother among them. You see him patrolling the fair and watch the crowd part around him.
214
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
215
Some drunk tourist is playing with firecrackers. Like he's in a foreign country whooping it up. Frolicking idiot's tossing packs into the crowd like popcorn and watching the folks disperse. A little kid is crouching to pick up a fallen toy when the crackers hit the pavement near her face. Suddenly her face is singed in soot. She screams. Her mother screams.
Oddjob Minister rushes over, picks the tourist off the ground and throws him. Pigs patrolling the event as well, looking for an incident. This is it. Two of them come to the rescue to protect and serve the drunken tourist. Ignore the mother and her child screaming for help. Trounce on Oddjob, pulling him away from the tourist, try to get him down. Try to get Oddjob down? That's a fucking job for twenty! Tosses them off like flies. By now the rest of brothers are alerted. Red Guard comes out of everywhere with every sort of rifle and pistol you can imagine. It's a red army. Pigs are smart. They're outnumbered. They run. They got nowhere to hide.
That night, expecting reprisal, Red Guards station themselves up and down Jackson Street and throw their anti-personnel arsenal—firecrackers and cherry bombs—into the street all night. You know what is all night? Long line of Guards must set off every available firecracker in Chinatown. How many bricks does it take? It's the Great Wall! Who knew you could sustain a battle as long as a celebration? Street's a smoke screen, and the crackling and popping never let up.
Revolutionaries are Monkey Kings; their golden rods are powerful, their supernatural powers far-reaching and their magic omnipotent, for they possess Mao Tse-tung's great invincible thought. We wield our golden rods, display our supernatural powers and use our magic to turn the old world upside down, smash it to pieces, pulverize it, create chaos and make a tremendous
mess, the bigger the better!
—Red Guards
Tsinghua University
June 24,1966
8: 1 Am the Vanguard
I heard it through the grapevine Not much longer would you be mine
People say, believe half of what you see Oh, and none of what you hear
—Gladys Knight
Smoke screen in the Moscow hotel room like a great cloud. RG and Panther sitting in that cloud hearing the past and present converge through a wispy grapevine. Everything gets that clarity when sitting in silence. Smoke thickens to a marbleized liquid substance, and the mind wanders into the future.
The dope proposes the inevitable possibility of change. Everything changing. Everything in flux. Moving on. Supposed to change inevitably from this ism to that ism. Are you going to be there for the revolution? Are you going to be there kicking ass with the vanguard?
These are the days when we get the women to love their lumpen. That's the truth. Panther's today's number one lovin' lumpen. RG could be a fast second. Jail's a badge of courage. You could be Malcolm in the Charleston State Prison or MLK in the Birmingham Jail. How many women fall in love with those prison letters? Baby, baby. Get her one of those prisoners who dream about her every night. Enough to make her lose her mind. Next thing you know, she's toting a gun for you. She's your Mata Hari in a miniskirt with a .22 in her purse. She's the chorus backup for the revolutionary chanting. How come all of Chinatown's plastered with Free Huey flyers? She's tacked up every corner of the Chinese ghetto with his face, but what Chinese can relate to that? Still, you got to appreciate that she loves you more.
She's working the telephones at the office, waking up early to cook for the breakfast program, distributing the paper, running day care during the morning and a free school in the afternoons, lifting shit and raising
216
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL