Don't I get some wine and meat? What are you feeding them for?" Furthermore, he begins to say, why arer't you saving me? You are one of us, an outlaw like me.
But the outlaw scout cuts him off. "You," he sneers, "are a mere criminal who will soon be dead!"
At that moment, the policemen begin to fall limply to the ground, tossing their cups of wine and bowls of meat. All fifty of them pass out. The brave captain falls away too. It's a trick as old as the thirteenth century.
Iron Ox bursts from his ropes and grabs the nearest sword. First he kills the unscrupulously wealthy bureaucrat. That's a messy but deserved death for a man who's spent his career extorting the people. This must be why Chairman Mao loves the outlaws. Then Iron Ox cuts open the stomachs of the five hunters who couldn't kill the four tigers in the first place. Then he slashes the throat of the wife of the fake outlaw. Worthless woman who couldn't provide vegetables and meat with three pecks of rice, and then has the audacity to turn him in for beheading her husband. Finally, he battles all fifty policemen, even though they are drugged and useless fighters. He cuts them all down in the prime of their youth. Everyone is lying dead in big pools of blood and gore by the roadside.
Only the brave police captain remains. He is known as the Black-Eyed Tiger. He wakes up to battle the Black Whirlwind. They fight for hours in seven bouts. Finally, the Black-Eyed Tiger is convinced that his career in the police force is ended. The spectacle of carnage is all around him. He joins the outlaws, marching away with Iron Ox toward a destiny mandated by the heavens.
And honey, that's just one outlaw story. There're 107 more.
228
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
2: Theater of the Double Ax
So honey, what's all this boohooing over masculinity? Boohoo. I've been weeping so long, I'm going to go blind. A lot of good that will do. You'll probably leave me dehydrated next to some green boulder and let mad tigers gnaw on my private parts and eat out my heart. Eat my heart out! But baby, I'm by your side, questing the same quest for the Asian outlaw. Any man who can kill fifty policemen, five tiger hunters, one lousy bureaucrat, and one tossed-in woman in one paragraph has my congratulations. Now that's literary massacre.
Oh, I'm in perfect agreement. This is a war. You've made your declaration. The pen is mightier than the sword. It's your hatchet, your ax, and you've got two of them, one in each hand. You're ambidextrous. Oooo, ambidextrous. I should know. You want to grind this ax. I'll grind it for you. Oh no, don't you let them talk about how poetry is for faggots. You might have long nails, but they're for playing your guitar. O.K., you might be a faggot, doing flamenco with Lorca, but this is still a man's job. Most importantly, let's get some tongue action in there. Since when did they lop it off too? That's right, they never did. It's all metaphorically speaking, and only you can lick those metaphors. Time to wag that thick honey tongue of yours, translate all those grunts and gutturals to the page. Aiiieeeee!
AX I
Characters
PA (paper name: AH GEE; real name: SUNG CHIANG), owner of a Chinese delicatessen and father of Jive sets of Siamese twins:
CHARLIE CHAN and #1 SON
MAO and CONFUCIUS
GREEN HORNET and KATO CAPTAIN KIRK and MR. ZULU FU MANCHU and DRAGON LADY
I HOTEL
229
Place
Asian America (where's that?)
Time 1971
Now, it's just possible you'd prefer to read the original dramatic play in all its scenes and acts, hack out the middlewoman as it were, and you are perfectly free to do so. But I'm all for reading the reviews and the CliffNotes, watching the trailers, and making use of any shortcuts available. If a play is any good, my opinion is that you ought to be able to strip it down and dress it all back up. So let me strip this down for you.
Pa is a longtime Californ. That's right. This great general of the outlaws is really Sung Chiang, hiding out in America using a paper name. This is the great conspiracy: 108 outlaws snuck through Angel Island using paper names. Pa's Ah Gee cover is that he's the owner of a third-generation delicatessen that's been hanging slabs of red barbequed pork, roasted ducks, and soy sauce chickens from their necks for almost a century. Similarly, his band of outlaws is scattered across Gold Mountain pretending to be hardworking laborers—pressing laundry, firing up woks, busing tables, picking asparagus, shifting locks on railroad tracks. Any day now they'll be called to their heavenly duties, but in the meantime, it looks like they're becoming a gang of old farts.
In Pa's case, he's got a load of kids, a pretty good count—nine sons and one helluva daughter, but this scenario's not without complications. His long-suffering wife gave birth to five sets of twins and finally gave up the ghost with the last labor of love. Discovering that she'd finally produced a daughter was a brief moment of joy followed by a broken heart upon learning that, once again, she'd birthed an attached set. Pa doesn't mince his words; he says, "My beautiful wife, your ma. You (points at Fu Manchu and Dragon Lady) born. She take a second look, scream AIYA! And die." A widower with five sets of American-born twins. My my. He's in deep cover, but is it worth the quintuple headache?
The stage directions for representing Siamese twins are vague. Actors might share a pant leg or be drawn together in a constant embrace with appropriate costuming. Clever use of acrobatics might produce grotesquely
230
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
comic attachments. This might be a director's nightmare, but the playwright insists on the visual possibilities of the circus—an Asian freak show. As I always say, it's best to use your imagination.
But use your imagination to what end? What's the point of this circus of Siamese twins fathered by a hapless outlaw? Come to America, and your children all come out hyphenated. Half this-half that. Nothing whole. Everything half-assed. And it's more complicated than that. One half trying to be the other half and vice versa. As they say, duking out the dialectics. Working through schizophrenia and assimilation. Poor man. These kids drive him nuts. He's taught them everything they know, but still they have no respect. They think they're supposed to be free in Asian America.
Pa commiserates with a customer.
CUSTOMER. These kids all sneaking around with split personalities. What they call it? Identity crisis.
PA.   Ha! (unhooks skewered roast duck and tosses it on the chop block) Think you got problems!
CUSTOMER. Where did this second personality come from?
PA.   What? (picks up cleaver, slits open duck, and dumps out soy sauce marinade) Who not split? Every paper son split in two memories. Now whose fault that?
CUSTOMER. Who knows who is fault? But they blaming us. PA.   (brings cleaver down on duck neck; shwack!) Who?
CUSTOMER. Kids. Blaming us. We don't set good example. Continue to live like Chinese in America.
PA.  Whatsa matter that? (cleaves duck in half; shwack!)
CUSTOMER. Gets them confused. Don't know if they coming or going.
PA.  That's it! (waves cleaver around) I get them coming and going. (leaves, marching off with cleaver)
CUSTOMER. Hey, where you going? What about my duck?
I HOTEL
231
Now I wouldn't want to spoil the end for you. But just think about this lot of thankless sons wallowing in their duplicity. Our hero Pa goes off with his cleaver in search of each paired progeny, and that in itself is a search for Asian America (where's that?).
AX INTERLUDE
II Piccolo. Coffee house in Chinatown. Council of the Third World Liberation Front. Various representatives of the colonized arrive: blacks, Mexicans, Native Americans, Pilipinos, Chinese, and Japanese. There's some jockeying for position, but they all settle down in chairs around the small tables, adjusting their attitudes for a powwow.
BSU REP. Let's get this meeting started, (general agreement) Now what we need to negotiate here is what our demands are in terms of getting faculty for our programs. The way the BSU sees it, each group should propose a number of positions.
LA RAZA REP. Each group should get an equal number of positions. NATIVE AMERICAN REP. I agree.
LA RAZA REP. It's like, if it's five positions, it's five for blacks, five for Native Americans, five for us, and five for the Asians. That's five times four, twenty positions.
BSU REP. Seems like we should be working from a question of need, dig? Who needs more faculty?
JAPANESE REP. What does that mean? How do you determine need? NATIVE AMERICAN REP. That's right. We're starting from nothing.
CHINESE REP. I think you miscounted the groups. Look at who's represented here, (points) BSU, La Raza, Pilipinos, Chinese, Native Americans, and Japanese. I count six groups. On that plan, we gotta ask for thirty positions.
BSU REP. Now aren't you overstating your presence? I mean, I take it you are all Asians, right? You constitute one group.
232
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
Suddenly, a young Chinese Wah Ching gangster type saunters in. He looks around at the strangers congregated and spits out his cigarette.
WAH CHING. What the fuck! Who are these guys? (He rushes over to a table and pulls out an ax, which is taped to the underside of the table for some reason. Raises the ax and brings it down violently on the table. Proceeds to chop up the table. Everyone jumps out of their seats and backs off.)
OWNER. Hey, hey! Stop! Stop!
WAH CHING. Fucking! Fucking! Fucking! (throws the ax into the pile of table pieces and runs off)
CHINESE REP. (takes the ax and hands it to the owner) Don't worry, uncle. We'll pay you back for the table.
OWNER, (shakes his head and walks away with the ax)
BSU REP. Shit. Who was that?
PILIPINO REP. Let's get back to this meeting before he comes back.
LA RAZA REP. Comes back?
CHINESE REP. Yeah, comes back with the others.
BSU REP. Others?
CHINESE REP. Don't worry. We'll take care of it.
JAPANESE REP. Where were we?
PILIPINO REP. Remember? We have to ask for positions for six groups.
JAPANESE REP. Who's writing this down?
Now, I always maintain that if you're gonna go to war, you've got to level the playing field. That's the power of theater. That's the theater of war. What's II Piccolo? Is it a coffee house? A doughnut shop? A Chinese cake and tea shop that plays Italian opera? Honey it's a stage, a dais for the imagination. It's reproduced in every city on every continent. Gather the intellectuals, the politicos, and the surrounding lowlifes to exchange
I HOTEL
233
the necessary drugs that fuel the imagination: caffeine, nicotine, absinthe, opium. So on the one hand, you have the revolutionaries staging their purposeful antics, and on the other, you've got the outlaw literati. Whose idea was that ax conveniently duct-taped to the bottom of the table anyway? What else are they hiding under the table?
As you might know, Jack Sung hangs out at II Piccolo. He's got his outlaw literati thing going, but it's all boys. Sandy Hu and I come around occasionally with our entourage, strut some femininity into the scene, make eye contact, and leave. We do it to get a rise out of the boys, let them know that we just might be out of their league.
AX II
Characters
SANDY HU (paper name), aka HU SAN (real name), a Chinese American poetess, actress, and chanteuse who in her other life is the outlaw swordswoman of double swords, the woman of ten feet of steel (two swords, five feet each)
NARRATOR (paper name), aka LADY MURASAKI (real name), an Asian American who as a little girl was raised by drag queens and left to fend for herself in the Forbidden City and who sometimes poses as the great novelist who wrote her memoirs of Japanese court life recounting the poetic trysts of the Japanese Casanova, Prince Genji.
Place
II Piccolo, Chinatown, Asian America (where's that?)
Time
Twilight, 1971
Sandy Hu and I make our entrance. I should say en-trance.
For Sandy: stilettos that puncture the floor with every step. For me: spiked boots. I start with the feet because first you hear us coming. You look for the footfalls and get a load of Sandy's net stockings with dragons running up her thighs, a leather miniskirt that almost reveals her embroidered bikini panties, and a tight-fitting knit turtleneck under an orange brocade Chinois jacket.
Me: sleek leather pants and a low-cut silk blouse just barely covering black lace lingerie, topped with an Argentine fedora with matching ribbon and pheasant panache. Lots of bangles and silver and gold dangling, eyelashes flashing, and lips glossed into a deep shimmer.
Every other woman is looking for the Japonified Pre-Raphaelite Dante Gabriel Rossetti look, but Sandy and I have already been through that stage. Our wardrobe is constantly evolving. Besides, we hate folk singing. All right, so this is an overstatement, but if not us, who?
We survey the scene while our ensemble sets up: bongos, electronic keyboard, and tenor sax. Minimal. Sandy and I sing a capella into the mike to warm up. She does the upper melodies and I provide the alto. We exchange song for breathless poetry, snarls, uhuh uhuh, ouou, and massage the crowd with our jazz voice renditions. Meanwhile the communal jug passes, everybody's lips partaking of a purple swig of Christian Brothers. Blessed be in the name of the Mother, the Daughter, the Sister, and the Lunar Spirit.
Enter HU SAN and LADY MURASAKI from opposite ends of the stage, with enormous matching bags filled with appropriate paraphernalia. They approach a large, empty frame midst age that represents a giant looking glass. Although they are not attired in the same fashion, their steps and movements mirror each other. They spend some time removing and applying lipstick and other makeup, donning various wigs and headgear, stepping into footwear, and shedding and slinking into a variety of silk garments from cheongsam to flowing kimono. This carefully choreographed dance with accompanying music recalls the women of various films and musicals: Shanghai Express, Flower Drum Song, The World of Suzie Wong, Teahouse of the August Moon, Sayonara, etc.
SUB-SCENE/DANCE II
HU SAN and LADY MURASAKI dance while wielding thick sabers, taunting and menacing the audience. HU SAN and LADY MURASAKI move into the audience, and at the point of their sabers, each takes a man hostage. They pull their hostages to the stage and demand that the men lie down on the floor. Perhaps pillows are provided for the heads. HU SAN and LADY MURASAKI kneel ritualistically to the side and "perform" koto music over their hostages male bodies. Pluck. Pluck. Pluck.
234
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
235
SUB-SCENE/DANCE 2:
HU SAN and LADY MURASAKI dance 'while wielding daggers, again taunting and menacing the audience. HU SAN and LADY MURASAKI move into the audience, and at the point of their daggers, each takes a second man hostage. They pull their hostages to the stage and demand that they lie facedown on the floor. Perhaps mats and pillows are provided. HU SAN and LADY MURASAKI remove their footwear—possibly stilettos or tall lacquered clogs—and walk in tiny steps with bare feet over the backs of the hostages' male bodies. Step. Step. Step.
SUB-SCENE/DANCE 3:
HU SAN and LADY MURASAKI dance a final dance with long samurai swords, taunting and menacing the audience. HU SAN and LADY MURASAKI swagger into the audience, and at the point of their swords, each takes a third man hostage. They pull their hostages to the stage and demand that they lie down on the floor. Again, perhaps a pillow is provided. Perhaps a quilt. Cutting boards are ritualistically placed on top of each man, perhaps on his chest or stomach or ... A porcelain plate is placed in the upraised palm of the mans hand. On each cutting board is a slab of raw tuna. In a final dramatic dance with swordplay, HU SAN and LADY MURASAKI bring down their swords to cut the fish. Slice! Slice! Slice!
And honey, don't forget the drumroll and the clanging cymbals. Hyah! Hyah! Hyooooouh! Of course I always whisper into my man's ear to keep him calm through the whole ordeal: It's all right, baby. You know I'd never really hurt you. And at the end, it's scoop! with the tip of my samurai sword to his proffered plate. Like Benihana: shwap! A subtle splash of soy sauce and a dab of hot wasabi. You know, I always feed my man oh so delicately with a piece of that raw business. I might use chopsticks, or I just might use my bare fingers.
236
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
5: LiangShan Po, California
Now, as Pearl Buck tried to make clear, all men are brothers once they are orphaned. And once a man is orphaned, he is free to create himself, to be self-made. Orphaned brothers are free to reformulate their loyalties, wresting brotherly power and territory from emperors, usurpers, usurers, priests, and bureaucrats. And while they're at it, they've taken Gold Mountain. Let La Raza have Aztlan; we've taken the entire mother lode, crisscrossed by transcontinental railroads.
The following story takes place in the Gold Mountain hideout of Liang Shan Po, California, where a boy, one day to become the great outlaw leader, is being raised by a poor white couple.
The boy saw the lizard slide from the shadows beneath a clump of brush and scamper across the road, making a swishing trail across the dusty surface. He ran forward and pounced like a cat and missed, his chin hitting the dirt. He spit away the grit stuck to his lower lip and continued his pursuit, scuttling like the lizard and pushing off from his bare toes. The lizard was headed for a higher perch in the old pine. On the third try, he grasped at the tail before the lizard scaled the tree, snatching hard. He felt the wiggling tail between his fingers and excitedly drew his prey to eye level, the eye level of a five-year-old. The appendage twitched, then hung there, eventually lifeless without its body. He looked up to see the attenuated lizard scamper higher into the knotty bark and dark evergreens.
"Chinaboy!" She called from the open door of the house that was more a lean-to that seemed to have lost what it had been leaning into. Perhaps it had been a barracks for migrant workers long moved on to other labors.
He saw her through a pillow of dust and hair that she swept off the steps from the worn timber floor, and he ran with his catch. Her graying brown hair was pulled back into a low ponytail. She pulled a handkerchief from her apron pocket and sneezed.
I HOTEL
237