Tom: Today's top story: Twenty-six-year-old Angela Davis, the once political philosopher at UCLA who was fired because of her affiliation with the Communist Party USA, was linked to the Marin County Courthouse shootout earlier this week... . We have Lisa Cornwaller in California with Governor Reagan. Lisa.... Lisa: Thanks, Tom. Governor Reagan, would you consider Angela Davis dangerous? Reagan: Yes, she is a Communist.
—Channel 45, 6:00 PM News August 24,1970
l?7l:Aiiieeeee! Hotel
220
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I: Outlaws

Honey, there are inlaws and there are outlaws. I will always be an outlaw. How I love my outlaws, all 108 of them. Go skinny dipping with the merry men in the Water Margin. Some women look for their men in the zodiac, but I can't work with those limitations: twelve lunar months, twelve-year cycles. What's that? I'm looking at 108 incarnations of the stars. I'm working my way through the first set of thirty-six heavenly heroes right now. After that, there are seventy-two earthly fiends to go. Sure, you get bravery and wealth, but then you get ravage and machinations. Then it's madness and penetration. Give me slaughter, crime, disaster. Give me murder. Swords and axes. Whips and daggers. Give me liberty or give me death!
But let me set up the backdrop for a little talk story as they say. Lately everyone's into this talk story, like the fairy tale was reinvented yesterday.
You know, the Slanted Eye does the light shows for all the Asian troubadours. They infiltrated the Fillmore and got away with psychedelic's
I HOTEL
223
secrets: oil and colored water in glass bowls on overhead projectors. Now they project Ho Chi Minh and Chairman Mao over what looks like lava lamps. Do this to a jazz rendition of "East is Red." They have their Kodak slide carousels stacked up with all manner of Asian American photographic subject matter: barbed wired internment camps (sacred shakuhachi accompanying), Chinatown playground (Chinese lute plucking), manongs at the I-Hotel (ukuleles). Now, that's the tame stuff.
So now I slip in the carousel with the outlaws, my Chinese banditos, those killer men with their powerful bare chests, wild hair, fu manchus, and painted grimaces. But stop at number twenty-one. He's the Iron Ox. They call him the Murderer, the Black Whirlwind, with his double-ax action. He's iron, but he's also irrepressible. And the more he drinks, the meaner and more unruly he gets. Get in his way, and he'll hack you to pieces for no reason at all. Once he gets going with the axing, he won't stop till everyone's dead. Who can resist? Slanted Eye gives the oil/blood water combination some pulsating action, and the Black Whirlwind appears and disappears like a bad dream.
Once upon a time ...
Iron Ox has joined the outlaws up in the mountains. He is a trusted and loyal member of the outlaw band. One day the chief outlaw, Timely Rain, finds Iron Ox at the main gate crying loudly. That's right. A grown man who is also a known for hacking folks in half with his ax is bawling like a baby. It's the thirteenth century. He can cry all he wants.
What is the matter? Iron Ox complains to Timely Rain, "Other outlaws can bring their fathers to our mountain hideout, and some are given permission to visit their mothers. Only I, Iron Ox, am not allowed to see my poor mother, who lives in poverty." Now, I could be wrong, but I see an Oedipal message here, but then these guys are Chinese, not Greek. Let's not get our psychoanalyses and cultures confused, shall we?
Timely Rain thinks about this. "O.K., you can travel to see your mother, on three conditions. One, you must not drink wine along the way. Two, you must go alone, because you always get your companions in trouble. Three, you must not take your axes. Don't get into any trouble, and come back quickly."
224
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
Iron Ox doesn't take his trusty axes, but he does arm himself with two swords. Axes? Swords? And you thought these outlaws only used their bare hands!
Along the way he meets a common brigand in a red silk turban with two axes. "Stop!" shouts the brigand, raising his axes. "I am the feared outlaw, the Black Whirlwind. Pay a toll, or I will hack you to pieces!"
Iron Ox scratches his head. Who is this guy? I am Iron Ox, also known as the Black Whirlwind. Are there two of us? He looks at his double and shakes his head. It's very confusing. Maybe it's the stupid red turban. He'd better settle this matter. He slaps the fake Black Whirlwind down with his sword and gets ready to kill him. There, that's better. I must be authentic. That one is fake.
The fake outlaw trembles and pleads for his life. "Don't kill me! If you kill me, you will kill two of us. I am only impersonating the Black Whirlwind in order to get money to support my poor mother. If I die, so does she!"
"What's this about impersonating me?"
"Normally people run away at the very sound of your terrible name." The fake outlaw trembles, and Iron Ox thinks about this. This sniveling faker could ruin his reputation. He should kill him now. But it's a good thing for the faker that Iron Ox isn't drinking. He thinks about this two-for-one proposition. This fake Black Whirlwind still has some things in common with the real Black Whirlwind. They both have poor mothers. Such a coincidence. Iron Ox lets the fake outlaw go. He says, "Take this money and start a new life with your poor mother." He's feeling generous and nostalgic for his own mother as he watches his fake self run away.
Now he's hungry. Actually he's always hungry. So he continues his travels, finding a farmhouse along the way. He announces to the woman living there, "How about some food?" O.K., no wine. He promised.
She says, "Will a peck of rice do?"
He says, "Three pecks would be better." Look at his size. He's a big guy.
She goes off to cook the rice, and he goes off to the privy to relieve himself. Sitting in the privy, he hears the conversation between the woman and her husband.
"Pssst! "The husband calls her over. He's the fake outlaw who ran away! He tells his wife what's happened, that he lied about a poor mother in
I HOTEL
225
order to save his life. Why couldn't he have lied about a poor wife? That would have been closer to the truth.
That's it, thinks Iron Ox. I've been lied to. He pulls up his drawers, or whatever Chinese bandits use, stomps out of the privy, draws his sword, and cuts off the faker's head, red silk turban and all.
Meanwhile the wife runs away, but thankfully the rice is cooked. Where're the vegetables and meat? Oh well. Iron Ox settles down and eats three pecks. Then he drags the bloody, headless corpse of the fake outlaw into the farmhouse and torches the whole thing. The fire rages behind him as he walks off.
We could say he walks off into the sunset, but the day's not over. Around five o'clock, Iron Ox comes to his old village and pushes in the door of his old home. There's his impoverished mother. Ma! She says, "Where have you been, my Iron Ox? I have wept so long for you, I have become blind with my weeping." Now that's a guilt trip.
Next thing you know, he scoops up his ma and puts her on his back. It's decided. He's taking this blind woman back to the mountain hideout to live in peace with a band of 108 criminals. He carries her through the back mountain roads until she complains, "I'm dying of thirst."
O.K. Ma. He sets her down by a green boulder in the shade along with his swords and goes off to find water. He finds a stream next to a temple, but the problem is how to bring water back to Ma. This is where being strong and dumb comes in handy. What about that stone incense urn in front of the temple? It should hold a load of water. But first he's got to rip it out of the earth, breaking it from its mortar base. Then after he rips it out, he's got a five-hundred-pound urn to drag to the stream to fill with water, and by the time he gets it filled, he's got a thousand-pound urn to drag back to Ma.
When he gets back to the green boulder, where's Ma? His swords are resting quietly in the grass. It's a little too quiet, and there's a trickle of blood dribbling away from the boulder. Ma! He follows the dribble of blood to the mouth of a cave, where he finds two tiger cubs gnawing on a human leg. Ma's leg! Ma's ripped up, spread out all over the place. Her old clothes and bones and white hair shredded in grotesque pieces everywhere. Ma! Her Iron Ox goes crazy. You've never seen him this mad or this fierce, even in battle. The hairs of his mustache stand out like porcupine quills. He picks up the tiger cubs and slashes them to pieces. But
that's the easy part. Now he has to fight the tigress and the tiger. He brings her down with his dagger and him with his sword. Now there are human parts and bloody tiger all over. He wanders around weeping, trying to figure out what's Ma and what's not. He gathers up her pieces and buries them behind the temple. Exhausted, he finally falls asleep at her grave. Maybe there's a lesson in this, but it's difficult to say.
O.K., you think the story ends there, but it doesn't. So the next day Iron Ox wakes up. Ma's dead, but he's still her Iron Ox with a big appetite. He's got to find himself some food. He runs into five hunters who wonder about the blood on him. "What happened to you?"
"I had to kill four tigers who killed my ma."
The hunters are really impressed. Four tigers? "We've been trying to kill those beasts without success for years." Who is this guy? They bring him to the house of an unscrupulously wealthy bureaucrat to get some food and a change of clothing. They celebrate the heroic killing of the four tigers and eat and drink and eat and drink. Iron Ox has forgotten his promise to Timely Rain not to drink wine. But then, poor Ma is dead anyway. Pretty soon he's one drunk whirlwind. As he falls into a stupor, he doesn't see the wife of the fake outlaw he beheaded hiding in the wings.
So of course when he wakes up, he's a captive. A brave police captain with fifty policemen have come to make his arrest. They bind him up in ropes and take him away. It looks like the end of the line for the Black Whirlwind. The real one, this time.
Meanwhile, Timely Rain has foreseen possible mishaps in Iron Ox's plan to visit his mother. He's sent an outlaw scout to tail him. Sure enough, Iron Ox, guarded by fifty police, led by a valiant and courageous police captain, is marched into town. What a commotion! What to do?
The outlaw scout rushes to greet the captain and his police with a contingent of servile servants and gifts of meat and wine—just a small token of local appreciation for their gallantry. The brave captain dismounts his horse. He is much too polite to refuse a small toast, but sips only a drop. Now there's a man on duty.
"Please," the outlaw scout plies the captain. "Your men are hungry. Let them enjoy the wine and drink."
Iron Ox can't help himself. He ate and drank last night, but this is the next day. "Hey," he roars, struggling behind his ropes. "What about me?
226
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
227
Don't I get some wine and meat? What are you feeding them for?" Furthermore, he begins to say, why arer't you saving me? You are one of us, an outlaw like me.
But the outlaw scout cuts him off. "You," he sneers, "are a mere criminal who will soon be dead!"
At that moment, the policemen begin to fall limply to the ground, tossing their cups of wine and bowls of meat. All fifty of them pass out. The brave captain falls away too. It's a trick as old as the thirteenth century.
Iron Ox bursts from his ropes and grabs the nearest sword. First he kills the unscrupulously wealthy bureaucrat. That's a messy but deserved death for a man who's spent his career extorting the people. This must be why Chairman Mao loves the outlaws. Then Iron Ox cuts open the stomachs of the five hunters who couldn't kill the four tigers in the first place. Then he slashes the throat of the wife of the fake outlaw. Worthless woman who couldn't provide vegetables and meat with three pecks of rice, and then has the audacity to turn him in for beheading her husband. Finally, he battles all fifty policemen, even though they are drugged and useless fighters. He cuts them all down in the prime of their youth. Everyone is lying dead in big pools of blood and gore by the roadside.
Only the brave police captain remains. He is known as the Black-Eyed Tiger. He wakes up to battle the Black Whirlwind. They fight for hours in seven bouts. Finally, the Black-Eyed Tiger is convinced that his career in the police force is ended. The spectacle of carnage is all around him. He joins the outlaws, marching away with Iron Ox toward a destiny mandated by the heavens.
And honey, that's just one outlaw story. There're 107 more.
228
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
2: Theater of the Double Ax
So honey, what's all this boohooing over masculinity? Boohoo. I've been weeping so long, I'm going to go blind. A lot of good that will do. You'll probably leave me dehydrated next to some green boulder and let mad tigers gnaw on my private parts and eat out my heart. Eat my heart out! But baby, I'm by your side, questing the same quest for the Asian outlaw. Any man who can kill fifty policemen, five tiger hunters, one lousy bureaucrat, and one tossed-in woman in one paragraph has my congratulations. Now that's literary massacre.
Oh, I'm in perfect agreement. This is a war. You've made your declaration. The pen is mightier than the sword. It's your hatchet, your ax, and you've got two of them, one in each hand. You're ambidextrous. Oooo, ambidextrous. I should know. You want to grind this ax. I'll grind it for you. Oh no, don't you let them talk about how poetry is for faggots. You might have long nails, but they're for playing your guitar. O.K., you might be a faggot, doing flamenco with Lorca, but this is still a man's job. Most importantly, let's get some tongue action in there. Since when did they lop it off too? That's right, they never did. It's all metaphorically speaking, and only you can lick those metaphors. Time to wag that thick honey tongue of yours, translate all those grunts and gutturals to the page. Aiiieeeee!
AX I
Characters
PA (paper name: AH GEE; real name: SUNG CHIANG), owner of a Chinese delicatessen and father of Jive sets of Siamese twins:
CHARLIE CHAN and #1 SON
MAO and CONFUCIUS
GREEN HORNET and KATO CAPTAIN KIRK and MR. ZULU FU MANCHU and DRAGON LADY
I HOTEL
229