SUB-SCENE/DANCE 2:
HU SAN and LADY MURASAKI dance 'while wielding daggers, again taunting and menacing the audience. HU SAN and LADY MURASAKI move into the audience, and at the point of their daggers, each takes a second man hostage. They pull their hostages to the stage and demand that they lie facedown on the floor. Perhaps mats and pillows are provided. HU SAN and LADY MURASAKI remove their footwear—possibly stilettos or tall lacquered clogs—and walk in tiny steps with bare feet over the backs of the hostages' male bodies. Step. Step. Step.
SUB-SCENE/DANCE 3:
HU SAN and LADY MURASAKI dance a final dance with long samurai swords, taunting and menacing the audience. HU SAN and LADY MURASAKI swagger into the audience, and at the point of their swords, each takes a third man hostage. They pull their hostages to the stage and demand that they lie down on the floor. Again, perhaps a pillow is provided. Perhaps a quilt. Cutting boards are ritualistically placed on top of each man, perhaps on his chest or stomach or ... A porcelain plate is placed in the upraised palm of the mans hand. On each cutting board is a slab of raw tuna. In a final dramatic dance with swordplay, HU SAN and LADY MURASAKI bring down their swords to cut the fish. Slice! Slice! Slice!
And honey, don't forget the drumroll and the clanging cymbals. Hyah! Hyah! Hyooooouh! Of course I always whisper into my man's ear to keep him calm through the whole ordeal: It's all right, baby. You know I'd never really hurt you. And at the end, it's scoop! with the tip of my samurai sword to his proffered plate. Like Benihana: shwap! A subtle splash of soy sauce and a dab of hot wasabi. You know, I always feed my man oh so delicately with a piece of that raw business. I might use chopsticks, or I just might use my bare fingers.
236
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
3: LiangShan Po, California
Now, as Pearl Buck tried to make clear, all men are brothers once they are orphaned. And once a man is orphaned, he is free to create himself, to be self-made. Orphaned brothers are free to reformulate their loyalties, wresting brotherly power and territory from emperors, usurpers, usurers, priests, and bureaucrats. And while they're at it, they've taken Gold Mountain. Let La Raza have Aztlan; we've taken the entire mother lode, crisscrossed by transcontinental railroads.
The following story takes place in the Gold Mountain hideout of Liang Shan Po, California, where a boy, one day to become the great outlaw leader, is being raised by a poor white couple.
The boy saw the lizard slide from the shadows beneath a clump of brush and scamper across the road, making a swishing trail across the dusty surface. He ran forward and pounced like a cat and missed, his chin hitting the dirt. He spit away the grit stuck to his lower lip and continued his pursuit, scuttling like the lizard and pushing off from his bare toes. The lizard was headed for a higher perch in the old pine. On the third try, he grasped at the tail before the lizard scaled the tree, snatching hard. He felt the wiggling tail between his fingers and excitedly drew his prey to eye level, the eye level of a five-year-old. The appendage twitched, then hung there, eventually lifeless without its body. He looked up to see the attenuated lizard scamper higher into the knotty bark and dark evergreens.
"Chinaboy!" She called from the open door of the house that was more a lean-to that seemed to have lost what it had been leaning into. Perhaps it had been a barracks for migrant workers long moved on to other labors.
He saw her through a pillow of dust and hair that she swept off the steps from the worn timber floor, and he ran with his catch. Her graying brown hair was pulled back into a low ponytail. She pulled a handkerchief from her apron pocket and sneezed.
I HOTEL
237
"Chasing varmint again?" She waved the broom around. "What you got there?" She snatched the lizard tail from his hand and tossed it away into the dirt. "Don't you bring that in here, you hear?"
The boy ran back to retrieve his tail.
She continued to sweep and gesticulate. "You bring that in, and you'll see. I'll cook it and make you eat it."
He picked up the tail and patted it in the palm of his hand. "Mama, it's my pet."
She glanced around but hid her amusement. "Half a pet, Chinaboy. That's what you got. Just half."
The sound of a motor and the crunch of tires against the gravel turn-in grumbled from past the pine tree. Both looked over to see the old green truck, paint flaking from rusty patches, grind to a halt. The man stepped out, his boot hitting the ground with a thud. The other leg was lame, and he pushed it out and limped around to the back of the truck, heaving out a bag of groceries and a box of supplies.
"You get paid?" the woman queried.
"Nope, but his money came." He patted the boy on the head. "Yes, Chinaboy, you are our little golden goose. Your egg comes like clockwork every month. Not much, but that you can depend on."
"You'd think by now they'd forgotten him. Never come once to see him."
"Got other ways, those Chinese."
"Gave away all the good factory jobs to the Chinese and the coloreds."
"We coulda gone too, so don't start."
"How many years it's been?"
"Four since the war started."
"Speaking of which, today's his birthday."
"Is that so? How about that." He looked at her significantly and placed his hand momentarily on her shoulder.
She looked away. "That's why I asked for the flour. I'm baking him a cake."
The man followed the woman into the house and set the bag on the table. He bent down and scooped the boy into his arms. "Hey there, Chinaboy," he bellowed. "How old are you today?"
"Five, Papa." He showed his full set of grimy fingers on one hand.
"Five big ones. Yes, you are."
In his other hand, the boy grasped the lizard tail.
"What you got there?" The man pointed.
"My pet."
The woman pulled out the sack of flour from the purchases and turned around. "I told you not to bring that thing in here."
The man smiled. "You only got the tail, Chinaboy."
The boy pulled the tail to his chest protectively. "I'll get the rest tomorrow," he said decisively.
"I bet you will," the man laughed and put the boy down. He gestured to the woman. "Let him keep it. It's his birthday."
"I'll cook it in his cake," she threatened.
But the boy had run off. He would hide it somewhere safe, and she'd never know.
The man chuckled. He drew a tiny red envelope from his pocket and handed it to the woman. "They sent another one this year."
She hefted the coin in the red envelope and added it to the other three sitting on the shelf next to Jimmy's photograph. "Devil money, do you think?" she asked.
The rest of the day, the boy hung around the house, occasionally sneaking off to check his lizard tail, then standing near the stove where he could smell the sweet scent of vanilla and sugar that spread magically from one end of the house to the other. He watched with attention as the woman whipped up the frosting and spread it carefully layer upon layer. She noticed his interest with amusement. "Where were you last year?" she asked. "I don't remember you underfoot like this."
"I don't know," he said, propping himself up on a chair to see her work.
"I haven't missed a year since you come here," she remarked. She pressed her hand over his forehead and pushed back the black bangs from his brows. "Time we cut your hair again. Not a curl on this China hair of yours. Not like Jimmy."
"Jimmy." The boy nodded.
"Remember Jimmy?"
"Yeah." He pointed at a photograph on a small shelf.
"Just as you came, he was leaving." She paused, looking out to nowhere in particular. "Has it been that long? Hey!" She slapped his hand away.
238
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
239
His hands were woven in crevices of dirt. "What did I tell you about washing up?" She grabbed him by the chest and held him over the sink, slathering a slippery bar of soap over his hands and wiping them on her apron. "Here, now." She set him down in the chair with the frosting bowl and a wooden spoon in his small lap. "You lick this clean. Make sure you do a good job. I'll be checking."
He grinned big at her.
"What do you say now?"
"Yes, Mama."
Later that evening he could hardly eat, and she had to coax him. "You eat up. Your cake's not walking anywhere."
"Five years old, Chinaboy."The man pushed his spoon across the plate and smiled.
"Got to get some schooling next year," the woman commented. "Wonder if his people have thought of that?"
The man nodded.
"He'll be needing a new set of clothing. Should ask for more. He'll be eating more too."
"You getting pretty attached to the boy." The man looked down at his plate. "In the beginning, I recall..." His voice trailed off.
She bit her lip and said, "Like you said, it's four years I been his mama. Did all the hard part, changed his diapers, bottle-fed him, helped him with his first steps. What his Chinese mama do for him?"
"Don't talk like that in front of him. He don't understand none of this."
She stood up to clear the table. "I'm not attached like that, you know. He's just a kid. I'm doing my job."
The man touched her elbow as she took his plate. "You doing a fine job."
She stood sadly with the plates in both hands and stared at the photograph of Jimmy on the shelf. It was a portrait of a smiling young man in uniform, an army cap hugging his shaved head. "He'd be twenty-one today," she whispered. "I can't forget it."
A knocking came from the door. The man was quiet, but she said, "That'd be Sam and Martha. I asked them over for cake."
"Cake!" smiled the boy.
"Go on and get the door." She nudged the boy. "You got company."
When they'd settled around the table with pieces of cake, the men talked about the war. Sam said, "I'm hearing the war could end this year."
"Europe maybe."
"Boys'11 come home."
"Turn right around and go on and fight the Japs."
"Our boys done their time."
Martha interrupted, looking at her friend. "Oh, that's all you men talk about, the war. Can't talk about nothing else." She patted the boy who sat next to her, frosting smeared over his cheeks. "Hey, Jackie, how's that cake, hon?"
Several months passed, but by the end of the year, a shiny blue sedan pulled up to the old pine tree. The boy saw a couple emerge from the car. They were nicely dressed, like city folks—he in a suit with a felt hat and she in a blue suit dress, stockings, and soft leather heels. He looked on with curiosity at these strangers, their black hair and Oriental features. He heard the sound of their voices chopping the air with punctuated speech he could not understand. When the woman saw him, she uttered an exclamation and hurried toward him. He ran away to hide.
Eventually the man came with his limping gait to find him. "Come on, Chinaboy. You got some visitors." He took the boy by the hand and walked slowly to the front of the house.
The woman was already there with a small bundle of his things. She said to the couple, "I kept his baby clothes. I couldn't bear to part with them. He was so cute in them. There's a change of clothes in there that fits him, though. But he's growing fast these days. Gonna be a tall fellow."
The Chinese woman pointed to the boy's head, noticing it was completely shaved.
"Oh, that. Lice. We had to shave his head a week ago. Infestation, you know. But he's rid of it now. He's been healthy all through. Only once we went to town for a fever. With all his antics, he never broke a bone."
"Yep," the man added. "He's one strong kid. Good disposition, too."
The woman pushed a few strands of her graying hair back and said, "Wish we could've had more warning you were coming. Got him cleaned up and ready."
240
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
241
The man said to the other man, "Hey, Sung, you know the life here. It's country, wide open. Air makes you strong. Dirt keeps you strong." He pounded his chest for effect. He nodded at the boy. "Right, boy?"
The boy pounded his chest too, and everyone laughed. .
"Chinaboy, you gonna get to ride in that pretty car there."
The boy balked and stepped back. He watched the strange woman take the bundle from Mama and put it in the car.
"Just a little trip, Chinaboy."
"You going, too?"
"Nope. Not today."
"Mama?"
"You know I got work to do."
"I got work to do too," replied the boy.
"Not today. You go on. Go take your ride."
"We'll be waiting here for you just the same."
Mama took the boy's hand and led him to the car. "You be good, now. Don't be giving your folks trouble. You show them I raised you right." She slipped four faded red envelopes into his pants pocket. "These are yours. Been saving them all this time." She leaned into the backseat, where he seemed engulfed by the big leather seat, hugged him hard and kissed his cheek, then rushed to close the door.
He looked up, trying to see out the window, a wide portal above his head, but her back was turned. The car backed slowly away from the old pine. He stared at the backs of the couple's heads, animated in foreign conversation, and watched the tree and the lean-to house recede into the distance forever. One by one, he pulled out each tiny envelope she had tucked away. Then he remembered; pushing his hand deeper into the pocket, he pressed his small palm around a desiccated piece of lizard tail.
All right, you're not impressed. It's just one of those best American short stories reprinted again and again in every literary magazine and Chinese American, Asian American, minority writers, new and promising American writers anthology you've seen lately. The story has appeared so many times that some reviewer said ho hum, another mother-son story, but it's actually the same story. How many Chinaboys
242
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
farmed out to whites so that Chinamamas can get the benefits of wartime factory work? Maybe those white trash Okie folks are abusive and not God-fearing. Maybe they're dishonest and bigoted, and they kidnap and enslave the kid. But every outlaw hero bound for glory, whether he is Moses or Abraham Lincoln or Tripmaster Monkey, has got to have his start.
I HOTEL
243