5: Sax & Violence
Patriarch
Matriarch
If it's II Piccolo by day, it's Jigoku by night and into the wee hours. Say you're in the mood to descend into a little hell. The J-Town version is underground, on the corner of Post and Buchanan. Imagine you got those cold stone demons leering at the gate as you make your way into the bowels. Every step down says you are bad, you are so so bad. You feel the heat of your descent, but the sound emanating at the bottom draws you down. It's the sinful sound of the double ax. The man under the dusty lights is blasting through both sides of his mouth — two saxophones in a one-man duet. You fall in love at once, but Gerald K. Li is Sandy Hu's new boyfriend, though soon to be her ex. But while he's hers, she loves him so. As I was saying, he's outlaw number twenty-one, just released on probation after doing four months at San Bruno County Jail. Even though they got him for assault and battery and resisting arrest, Sandy maintains that her honey did time as a political prisoner, protesting the fascist administration at San Francisco State College.
But let's return to the wee hours down in Jigoku. By this time, Flip at his keyboard has run down all the standbys, and the crowd is too drunk to notice the music changing, and the musicians are so gone to mellow that their instruments are playing on automatic. The sounds are moaning through the smoke and slapping together like humping bodies in rising and falling intensity like there is no tomorrow, and in Jigoku, maybe there is not.
So, there's Gerald wailing on his instruments: an alto to one side, a tenor to the other. Oh, he could do soprano, baby soprano, or any number of wind instruments. He's got a whole collection back home, antique reed pieces that don't exist anymore, flutes of every ethnic persuasion, nose flutes from the Philippines and such. He could abandon his saxophones for a shakuhachi if you like. It's all part of his extensive repertoire, understand? But tonight it's the twin saxophones that are in command. They hang from his lips like golden dragons blowing fire. Now, one thing you need to know: nobody makes music like this without
250
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
251
tasting some form of peyote; every shaman knows the sacrifice of the body for a higher knowledge.
* * *
But speaking of higher knowledge, it's only been a couple of days since Gerald had a run-in with the acting president of San Francisco State College. Not only was Gerald high (he's never not high), but he met the president high up in the sky going PSA from LAX to SFO. Imagine Gerald s surprise to find the president-professor in the aisle seat next to him, snapping together the metal pieces of his seatbelt over his middle-aged belly in clear obedience to the sweet tinkling voice of the stewardess in a shocking pink miniskirt with matching polka-dot blouse, scarf, and cap. Aye-aye, Captain!
So Gerald said, "Hey, don't I know you?" This is a completely rhetorical question; who wouldn't recognize the Japanese under the tam-o'-shanter with the pom-pom and the little mustache pasted to his upper lip?
"Oh, hello. Why yes, I'm president of San Francisco State College." Indeed.
"I'm Gerald. I go to State." He should have said he goes there occasionally, but why go into details.
"Excuse my curiosity, but weren't you the young man in line ahead of me with the saxophones?"
"That's me. They're up there." He pointed to the overhead baggage compartments. "How'd you know?"
"The shape of the cases. It s unusual to see someone carrying two. Are you studying music at our fine college?"
"You might say that."
"What's your persuasion?"
"What do you mean?"
"Classical? Bandstand? Rock?"
"Jazz."
The professor smiled approvingly. "You have a lot of luggage. I'm easy, you see." He pulled a harmonica out of his breast pocket. Now he must have thought he'd impress Gerald. "Sonny Boy Williamson, know him? He's my model."
"Cool. Plays with Muddy Waters."
"No, that's another Sonny Boy. I mean the original. There were two, you know. I knew the original Sonny Boy in Chicago before he died tragically in 1948."
He tossed this one to Gerald like a throwaway thought: "Then there's the Belgian Toots Thielemans. Once I saws Toots play with the Bird. I can't play sax like you, but that's when I thought maybe I might press my luck with the harp."
"You saw Bird play?" Oh my, now Gerald was trapped. All the president had to say next was he knew Trane, and Gerald was gone over to the other side.
"In Chicago in the forties. You weren't born yet."
"How about Coltrane?"
"I know his work. But I'll admit I'm still back with the old bebop. 'My Favorite Things,' though," he mentioned Coltrane's rendition. "I like that."
Gerald nodded.
The pink stewardess rolled up with her cart of goodies. "Gentlemen? Can I interest you in our drinks?"
The professor said, "I'll have scotch on the rocks. You?" he asked Gerald. "Don't worry. It's on me."
"Make that two," said Gerald, and Miss PSA passed over the little bottles of J&B that got poured over ice in glasses. They could have been cozy in a nightclub somewhere in old prewar Fillmore.
The professor imbibed casually. "Before I came to San Francisco, I used to do a jazz radio show in Chicago. I'm most familiar with the Chicago scene in the forties and fifties."
"Oh, interesting." Gerald thought about all of this. If the students knew, would it change anything? He wondered.
"That's when bebop made its appearance. Like anything new, folks hated it at first. It was the same reaction to modern art and Picasso."
"So, what do you think of guys like Cecil Taylor and Archie Shepp?"
"That's what I mean. Frankly, I feel they've gone over the edge. Like that fellow Jackson Pollack. I don't like it much at all."
Gerald thought he should test the professor with some other questions that students would like to know. "Do you listen to rock?"
"I have nothing against it. My children listen to it. Let me put it this way: the only electric guitar put to good use was Charlie Christian's."
252
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
253
"Christian played with Miles."
"And Parker and Thelonious Monk. I have a recording of them at Minton's. Do you know it's said that Christian coined the word bebop?"Gerald took a swig of his J&B and let the rocks settle in small clunks. He knew the protocol, the way a knowledge of jazz, or just any music, could be a test of your masculinity. Honey, now how did that happen? In any case, he had better even up the score, so he said, "It's the way Christian used the electric guitar that changed the music, used it to augment and diminish chords."
Now the professor nodded in approval. As the French say, formidable.
"So," continued Gerald, "you can see how the guitar is used by guys like Hendrix." He was showing he didn't have any musical prejudices, though he probably does.
The professor changed the subject, probably because he hates rock anyway. "When you have time, come by my office. I've got a collection of LPS and a turntable there."
"Thanks."
"By the way, I've been talking to Duke Ellington, and it's almost settled. I'm bringing Ellington and his band to our college. What do you think?" And this was the same guy who sent the TAG squad in to beat up black students? If only those Negroes would listen to jazz instead of James Brown.
But Gerald kept it mellow and uncomplicated, as if he could hear the indifference of Monk's cool piano over the plane's loudspeakers. Another J&B on the professor almost swindled his mind.
The conversation went on amiably and maturely like that for the duration of the short flight, until the pink stewardess came by with her sweet suggestions to store their tray tables and to reposition their seats to their upright and proper positions. Stiff-backed, Gerald and the professor braced themselves for the landing. The pink stewardess took her own seat, perky and at attention, and PSA dipped into and caressed the fog. Gerald practiced his circular breathing and heard a high c blow in his mind forever, heading for SFO'S spreading tarmac.
The crowd at Jigoku goes through a kind of metamorphosis so that by the wee hours there's new blood looking for the out there sound but can't
afford the price of the cover. They are the lost souls who stand outside in the cold, smoking and hoping to catch a whiff of the music through the open doors, and then slipping in for the second set on a nod from the bouncer who figures, what the hell. Then there are those who nuzzle in for a quick transaction to keep the buzz constant. We cozy around those little ashtrays on their circular pedestals with our elbows and palms propped to hold up our chins and that stub of cigarette, its forgotten ash trailing over because we're caught in Gerald's relentless trill and groan. Honey, you think you are dying, dying with every note.
So when Gerald and the professor landed at SFO, the jazz aficionados were in a good mood, and the professor said, "Do you need a ride into the city?"
"Hey, man. I'll take you up on that," said Gerald, grabbing his horns and slinging the straps over his shoulders. "I got these, plus I got to lug a suitcase of my stuff."
Gerald's suitcase went with the professor's briefcase into the trunk of a silver Oldsmobile, and they headed north into the city.
The professor asked, "Where do you live?"
"J-Town, on Laguna."
"Your family from here?"
"No. L.A."
"Visiting?"
"Yeah, thought I'd better see my mom."
"Has it been a while?"
"Four months."
"Studying, I hope."
Gerald paused, but thought, what the hell. "Not really."
"The strike interrupted your studies."
"You can say that again."
"Well, things have almost returned to normal." The professor was referring to the new semester.
"My mother would like that."
"I get letters all the time from your parents. They are all in agreement with me about this situation. They're the silent majority."
254
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
255
Gerald thought maybe this was a window of opportunity. At least he would do it for his mom, the silent majority.
"I wonder if you would consider a favor on my behalf," he opened up. "I mean as a student at State. It's not every day you talk to the president himself."
The professor pulled onto the freeway and grinned. "It depends. What are you asking?"
"Well, see, I'm on probation, and I need to be reinstated to continue my classes."
"Probation?"
"Yeah."
"Why?"
"See, I just got out of San Bruno a couple of weeks ago."
The professor's eyebrows raised in alarm. "You were in jail? May I ask why?"
"Well, I could have copped a plea, but I went to court. My mom said, 'See that woman who holds the scales? Well, they're tipped in favor of the money,' but I said, 'No, this is America. We can get justice.'What did I know?"
"What happened?"
"The jury was a bunch of old women. They found me guilty."
"Guilty of what?"
"Of defending this white girl. She was passing out these flyers, and this white guy pushed her over, grabbed her flyers, and threw them all over. So I went after him and tried to get the flyers back, and it got messy."
"Messy?"
"Yeah, he punched me, and nobody punches me." Gerald paused, and the professor waited. "I was defending myself, see."
"So the police arrested you."
"Well, the white guy took off in one direction, and I took off running down Holloway in the other. They didn't go after the white guy. They came after me."
"What were you doing on Holloway?"
"Protesting, like everyone else."
"You were striking? Then you deserved to be arrested."
"How did I deserve it? What about that white guy with the blue armband?"
The professor said, "Blue armband? Those students were showing their support for the college."
"By attacking a girl with flyers? If she'd been around to be my witness, I would have gotten off."
"She should have been arrested with you. You were blocking the entrance to a public institution and denying the right of other students to their educations. You were disturbing the peace. Being in jail should have given you time to reflect on this."
"Reflect?"
Gerald comes away from his solo, and the band pulls through on intuition. Flip takes over for a while, then Makoto, then Eiji, then Kamau. Keyboards to guitar to bass to drums and back, the improvisations circling like sweet magic. That's reflection. That's what Gerald has been missing while being locked up.
Gerald looks into the crowd and sees a familiar face waving him down. It's LaVan. Gerald shakes his head, and LaVan smiles. Gerald gives him a look like, who let you out? He can still see in his mind the piles of stolen electronic goods in the back of the house and the arguments going around about how LaVan's heist was a liability to the revolution, but when it all came around, who should be in the San Bruno County Jail doing time at the same time but LaVan.
LaVan had said, "What you doing here?"
"SF State sent me," Gerald smirked. "Field studies."
"No shit."
"You?"
"Man, it's cold out there this time of year. I get time for petty vagrancy, and I get a meal and a warm bed."
Gerald wondered if the trade-off was worth it.
LaVan said, "You got some smokes on you?"
"Yeah, man." Gerald handed LaVan a Kool.
"I noticed you rooming with the monster." LaVan referred to Gerald's cellmate, for whom everyone parted like the Red Sea.
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
257
"I give up my oatmeal for him every morning."
LaVan guffawed.
"I hate that mush shit," said Gerald.
"Monster leaving you alone?"
"So far. And some folks out there think I'm a monster."
LaVan chuckled. "Can you come up with a couple cartons?" LaVan pointed at the cigarettes.
"My mom is visiting in a week. What do they say? Visitors every twenty days?"
"Right. Come up with the smokes. I'll see what I can do."
Gerald never knew how it worked, but LaVan got him a private cell, as it were.
Back in the silver Oldsmobile, flying down One-oh-one to the city, Gerald turned to the president, who was gripping his power steering. "Reflect?" he repeated. The word stuck in his throat, a huge hungry lump. "You don't know what you're saying."
"The police were just doing their job," said the professor. The Oldsmobile squealed around the off-ramp a little too fast.
"The police didn't have to be there doing their job. You invited them in. See this?" Gerald pointed at the scar over his brow. He practically moved his head in front of the professor's view. "What sort of job is that, bashing an unarmed person?"
"Can you fault the police?" The professor's voice rose in pitch, and it was already high. "How many of you hooligans were throwing rocks?"
"Hooligans?" Gerald jumped in his seat.
"Right, hooligans. You were out there breaking windows!"
"I was not!"
"Starting fires!" The professor waved his fist around at the traffic. "Flushing books down the toilets!" That was unforgivable, and the professor looked like he was going to cry. "We had to tear out the plumbing system in the entire library! Do you know what that cost?"
"Who you blaming here? Who didn't want to negotiate?"
"Negotiate? What was there to negotiate? All you wanted was to destroy the college!"
"We were trying to build a Third World college. Build, not destroy!"
"Admit it," the professor continued his diatribe, "you were there with the rest of them, out to make trouble. And what for? You were being led around by the nose by your fascination with a small gang of Negro students, bunch of conmen, neo-Nazis, and common thieves!"
Every time the professor looked at Gerald to make his point, he pushed the wheel to the right, and the car swerved in and out of the lane.
"Shit, watch your driving, old man!"
"Who you calling an old man?"
"You. And who you calling conmen and neo-Nazis? You're the Nazi. You're a fucking fascist pig!" Gerald watched the car run the red light and heard the honking from the cross street.
"You're the fascist!" The professor was screaming now.
By now Gerald was needing a smoke, so he pulled out the toke he was saving under his jacket and lighted up. As he puffed urgently, he yelled, "Fucking fascist pig uncle Tom pig banana!"
"What's that you're doing?" Even the professor recognized the smell of cannabis. Now, wouldn't that be the scandal. If he would just keep running those red lights, maybe they'd be stopped by a cop, and the president of SFSC would be caught red-handed for possession. What did Gerald care as long as he didn't have to share a cell with him. "That's it!" The professor hit the brakes, and the car screeched into the curb. "Get out! Get out!"
Gerald jumped for his horn cases in the backseat, yanking them away, and kept up his yelling, trying to overcome the litany of GODDAMN! STUPID! DRUG ADDICT! WORTHLESS! KID! JAIL BIRD! GO TO HELL! GO TO HELL!:
"UNCLE TOJO! FASCIST PIG! PUPPET! PIG BANANA!" Gerald tumbled out of the car. He ran and yelled after it like some kind of maniac. "FUCKING BANANA! FUCKING BANANA!"
Suddenly he stopped and looked around. There he was on the corner of Post and Buchanan. Maybe the Olds had an old directional memory of Jimbo's Bop City on the same street, gone for the last five, maybe six years. Gerald shrugged and took his instruments from their cases, hooked them to the straps around his neck, and started to blow, right there on Post Street. It was all he'd wanted to do these past four months. He wanted to shake the memory of his mother standing there behind the glass, tears freefalling, showing him the cartons of cigarettes she brought
258
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
259
in a bag. She had looked so small and weary, but she still forgave him. She told everyone in the family that he wasn't a criminal like the others in there; he was just protesting, and everyone had a right to protest. Everyone had a right to protest.
He could hear the chaos of Coltrane's "Ascension," and that would be his fuck-off—it was everything a president was beyond understanding or knowing. It was Gerald's invisibility, the musician behind and beyond the music, the spirit of the man that blew through the horn, past his yellow skin, past all expectations. It would be everything he couldn't say because he wasn't a man of words. It would be his revolution.
Gerald gives LaVan the nod and takes his cue to pull in back to the melody. Sandy Hu struts up, throws Gerald a kiss, and takes a bow. She presses her lips to the microphone and intones that low honey voice of hers. She could say anything with that voice, and a man's heart would melt, his mind turn to jelly. She speaks her poem. "Don't do me like that," she says. "I will kill you." And we all want to be killed, drawn and quartered, molested by her voice. Don't do her like that. Lullaby. Dragon Lady. Her poetry goes on like that, gravelly and urgent. And the band holds an amorphous rhythm beneath, like holding its breath for her instrument. Finally she steps down, and the music hiccups back to loudness.
The fat guys who own Jigoku will keep hell open until daylight, as long as the bar keeps making its receipts. They'll send the waitresses home and bus the tables themselves. The musicians aren't going to make more; they just get time to do their own thing. When they quit, Jigoku goes to sleep. No one to complain about the noise and the commotion of folks high on legal and illegal remedies for whatever the spirit is suffering.
Gerald moves the melody to some kind of rapid perpetual motion, and the dream opens up like time is forever. Each musician follows suit, taking the rhythms out in multiple directions. And the individual instruments howl and scream, distinct and dissonant, pull at your genitals, rip at your heart, stroke everything until you're shaking and dripping from tears and sweat and all that funk.
Maybe it was five minutes or maybe it was an hour later. Gerald would never know because he was lost in his sound. The silver Oldsmobile pulled up abruptly with an angry squeal. The old man and his tarn jumped from the driver's seat, popped the cavernous trunk, and threw out Gerald's suitcase. The hard thing hit the side of the curb and popped open. All those shirts and pants so lovingly pressed and folded by Gerald's mother, along with boxers and what-have-you, flew up in a tangled mess as the suitcase bounced over the sidewalk. Gerald played the screech of the wheels and the rumble of the revving engine pushing off, the shock of the grandmothers and other passersby gawking at a man's wardrobe strewn in a scattered path to Jigoku.
260
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
26l