1O: Iron Ox
So the other night, that radical leftist group the JTC (stands for the Japan-town Collective) closed shop, just up and moved all their stuff out of that old Victorian on Sutter Street in the dead of night and hauled away every last piece of radical business and furniture. It isn't that they're giving up the radical life, mind you, or at least that's what folks are saying. Maybe they are going underground or merging with another radical formation. It's like that these days. You don't know which radical alphabet to pay attention to anymore. They come, give you a line, then join some other line. But not that they're looking to recruit the likes of moi.
Anyway, Sen Hama, who always pays attention to what's happening, gets this idea to start an art collective and to move into that emptiness left by the disappearance of the JTC. Move over revolutionaries! Here come the artists!
At first it's just Sen up there late into the night, building a studio for silkscreening, plus a light table, and setting up a darkroom for photography. One night Gerald K. Li wanders out of Jigoku and sees the light on upstairs at the Sutter place. He thinks maybe there's some action up there he's been missing and hunkers up the stairs with his axes. He finds Sen hard at work.
"Hey, Sen," Gerald growls, "what you got going here? Where's the party?"
"Just me, Gerald."
"Shit. I've been blowing all night, giving it up for others. Where's the payback?"
"I don't know, Gerald. Funny you should be here. You wanna help me set up for the next color?"
"Next color?" Gerald looks at the project at hand. "Hey, what's this?"
"That's you. It's the poster for your show."
"Me? Hey, it's me." Gerald nods. "Missing my axes."
"That's what we gotta do next. They go in here." Sen points to the blank area. "In gold."
288
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
"Nice." Gerald nods. "You did this, huh?"
"Yeah."
"It'll be my last show." Gerald grumbles.
"What do you mean?"
"They want me to play some other shit. My music is changing. I gotta go with the change. You know what I mean?"
"I understand. But don't stop playing."
"I'm not stopping. Just not playing for them."
So that's how it happens that Gerald quits Jigoku and starts hanging out with Sen at the arts collective. After they've run the next color, Gerald and Sen share a joint, which suddenly makes Sen loquacious, and he gets that fetid smoke to wander around the empty rooms and paints a graphic vision of his plan for this art studio. And Gerald sees the vision and gets excited and says, "Yeah, man, I hear you. And you could tear out this wall and put in a skylight to get some natural light. See, I know something about artists. It's all about light for you. For us, we can compose in the goddamn dark." He nudges Sen. "Different kind of sex, eh. With light. Without light."
Sen rolls his eyes.
And Gerald continues, "And over here is storage. And as for that darkroom plan, you got to put in some sinks and counters."
Sen says, "Yeah, I wanna tear out that old bathtub and wall off this area for a darkroom."They both stare at the curved iron tub with its rusting places in the white porcelain standing on its toes in the middle of dingy pink and cracked linoleum.
"No problem, let's do it."
"You know how much that iron ox weighs? We got to get some help to carry it out and down the stairs, don't forget. You drop it, and it'll put a hole in the floor."
"Hey, gimme a hand," says Gerald. He starts to tug at the thing.
"Stop!" Sen shouts. "We got to unhook the plumbing. You wanna flood the place?"
"Oh shit, yeah."
Sen comes back with tools, but meanwhile Gerald has opened and is hanging out the bathroom window looking out. Moon is full over the San Francisco night, one of those rare nights of no fog.
I HOTEL
289
Sen joins him at the window. He points at the empty lot below. "Hauled away the Victorian next door on truck beds. I don't know where they took it. This one is next, but they might just bust it down with a ball. Fucking redevelopment. "They finish off the joint in silence. Empty lot is strewn with rubbish, broken boards and glass, slabs of leftover concrete and stairs to nowhere, weeds flourishing in mud and garbage. Then Sen says, "You know People's Park, right?"
"Yeah, hippies on the Eastside."
"Yeah, well, when I get this studio running, my next plan is to start a garden down there. Mix it up. Japanese garden and bok choy. Put in a koi pond, benches, picnic area, maple coming up that way, bamboo. Rock garden over there."
Maybe it's the colors in the silkscreening. Maybe it's a combination of the exhaustion of playing music all night and the sweet watery clarity of the marijuana, but Gerald sees everything. The energy of the art studio presses behind him and the evening air breathes the garbage and detritus strewn below into a paradise. "I never thought about it, but maybe I need light to play."
"Moonlight?" asks Sen, observing the moon.
"All kinds of light," says Gerald. "Hey, I got an idea. A shortcut. Give me a hand here."
Mostly it's Gerald with Sen providing some stabilization, but they lift that iron ox from its pointed toes and shove it forward and out the open window. "Ouweeeeeeee!" At that moment, if you were high, you saw it tumble and twist in a ballet of slow motion down two stories—a fat white ox flying over and over and over the moon.
After that evening, Gerald pays a visit to the empty lot to see how deep a hole a bathtub might create falling from two stories up. He looks up. He looks down. "Damn. We didn't even check to see if someone was down here." He tugs at the thing wedged in the dirt. And from that moment on, he's a gardener. Who knows why? Maybe because he got the whole vision that night from above. The tub's gotta go over there under that lone tree, has got to be filled with water and a filter system, rocks and aquatic plants and goldfish. Then there's the path from the tub to a mossy area over here, cut a path with rocks and flowing water, build up this area
here to create the illusion of depth, bonsai here, a hedge of azalea here, and don't forget Sen's vegetable garden in this sunny area here. Pretty soon, the old folks are coming by, doing the weeding and planting green onions, napa, bok choy, tomatoes, zucchini, eggplant, cucumbers, mustard greens, chiso, wasabi, daikon, parsley, chrysanthemums, you name it. On the side, against the house, Gerald has a greenhouse going for the small shoots, orchids, and ferns. And some lady has her ceramic pots in there for pickling the vegetables.
Overlooking the garden, Sen paints a mural over the entire side of the house. Folks are up on the scaffolds for days painting in the numbers. One day Sen is putting in the finishing touches at the top of the house. He can hear Gerald wandering around the garden below, over the bridge and under the pines and maples, blowing on his sax. Nowadays, if you want to hear Gerald K. Li play, you have to pay a visit to the garden. If the old garde from Jigoku comes by and asks why, Gerald says, "I'm doing my thing." Sen listens for Gerald's thing. Then suddenly it's quiet. Hours later, Sen descends with his paintbrush, trying to remember where, from his high perch, he last saw Gerald in the garden. Under a maple in a grassy patch of filtered sunlight, he finds Gerald sitting closed-eyed in meditation, cross-legged and hugging his saxophones to either side. "Gerald," he whispers, but even then he knows. "Gerald," he asks again, even as he lightly touches the fingers wrapped around the Sax, as cold to the touch as the brassy metal itself.
Oh sweetheart, my train's here. My Iron Moonhunter's arriving, pushing itself out like a giant dark dick smoking out of the foggy night. It's loaded with my outlaws. Are you making this trip or what?
290
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
291