/: Doppelgangsters
ANP  KlllS   HER •    p)  >^ / ^ //
—r-r-——:""—'————l^   ^)    /'// t
)   T
A5 rnis  OCCURS, lTA'5    S»5TE ARRIVES  /WP $££$
KfLLS
3'UAH    WffH   0/V£
PULU   OUT   H£S?   fwO
Five- Foor swoft p$...
ANP   sputs   rne   TWINS
THE
Honey, you might be an orphaned brother, but what happens when you meet your orphaned double? In the case of the doppelganger, who is who? Who is real and who is fake?
Gerald K. Li says to Jack Sung, "Boss, I'm giving up women. I'm giving up drugs. I'm giving up booze. I'm giving up my wayward life. I'm turning over a new leaf for the revolution."
Jack Sung replies, "Give up women, drugs, and booze, O.K. But a wayward life? What's a revolution if we're not fighting for the wayward life?" Gerald says, "You got a point." After all, he can't give up his axes. "I'll be honest with you. I'm doing it for my mother. She's suffered enough on my behalf."
Jack says, "Don't you have a sister who can do the sacrificing?" Gerald says, "I got a model minority brother, but I'm the prodigal one." Jack says, "Mothers always go soft for the prodigals. Don't they ever learn?" Gerald says, "I gotta take that journey to make it up to my mother. Gotta take Highway Ninety-nine and make my amends." So that's how the journey begins.
Sandy Hu has a sweet little red vw Bug. Gerald's on the outs with his honey, so he might as well get something for his time. He pays her a last honeyed visit and works on her in every kama sutra direction. Baby, it takes hours, but she finally gets her satisfaction and falls asleep in deep fatigue, at which point he sneaks off, packs his twin axes, and rolls that shiny red Beetle down the driveway. Admittedly, he has a momentary thought about the Jack Daniels on top of the TV console and that fat little joint in the back kitchen drawer, but he's made his promises. Instead, he draws himself a generous loan from Sandy's secret stash of cash. Oh she'd appreciate his discretionary choices, but no time now for promissory notes. Highway Ninety-nine is waiting.
So the sun is peeking out from the East, beaming off the Beetle's red polish in the sweet early morning hours, and Gerald remembers he never
I HOTEL
265
had breakfast, and it's been a long and arduous night to satisfy a woman out of her particular vehicular needs. He's got to get himself some grub, as it were. But first he pulls over to the side of the road, choosing a pretty picket fence with a creeping vine of thorny roses and proceeds to pee. Looking down the road, he sees a man approaching with two black cases, one it each hand. The man stops near him, puts his cases down, and takes a pack of cigarettes from his pocket.
"Smoke?" he offers Gerald.
Gerald helps himself. "Where is this place?" he asks.
"Lodi," says the man with the two black cases.
"You coming home from a gig?" he asks, recognizing the cases that have to hold some kind of wind instruments.
"How'd you know?"
Gerald nods at the cases.
"My axes," he says.
"Oh yeah?"
"Let me introduce myself," says the man. Tm Gerald K. Li."
"What do you mean you're Gerald K. Li?"
"You don't know Gerald K. Li, the great Chinese saxophonist?"
"Well, yeah, but you're not even Chinese."
"How do you know?"
"Cuz I'm Chinese, and you're a white man."
"A white man can be Chinese. It's easy. We do it all the time."
Gerald looks hard at the white guy and thinks it could be true. This guy could be the white version of his Chinese self.
The white man puffs into the air. "It just can't happen the other way around. A Chinese can never be a white man."
Gerald thinks about this. "What do you play?"
"I do those riffs with an Oriental chinkified sound. Crowd loves it."
"Oh yeah?" Gerald asks, "How much did Gerald K. Li make last night from that gig of yours?"
"Not bad for Lodi. Hundred bucks."
"No shit." Gerald has never received a hundred for being himself. He reasons that amount of money could be substantial supplemental income for the journey. He steps onto his smoked-out cigarette butt and says, "I'm going to be needing that hundred."
266
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
HUNG GAR	PA KWA
Strike in 5 animal forms matched with 5 elemental forms: tiger with metal crane with wood dragon with fire leopard with water snake with earth
Strike in the 8 directions of the I Ching:
heaven-earth
wind-thunder
water-fire
mountain-lake
animal spirit tiger fists
Walk the circle from winter to autumn
I HOTEL
267
I
day to night
north to south
head to mouth
father to mother
elemental power iron threads
25 combinations Breathe
Yang
64 combinations Breathe
Yin
"Yellow-faced son of a bitch," mutters Gerald and picks the mans pockets for his hundred dollars. As it turns out, there's only ten. Must have had some debts to pay, reasons Gerald to himself. /'// have to take these instruments for collateral. He throws the cases into Sandy's VDub and drives out of Lodi in a hurry.
About an hour later, the hunger is unbearable, and he's really feeling the need for a couple of burgers and a milkshake. Just outside of Stockton, he saunters into a greasy diner and finds himself seated next to another Chinese American.
"Hey, man," Gerald says.
"Hey, man," the Chinese American local replies and does a double take. He points at Gerald and exclaims, "I know you! You're Gerald K. Li, the great Chinese American saxophonist."
"How'd you know?" Gerald asks.
"Who doesn't know? You're famous!" He puts out his hand. "I gotta shake your hand. This is amazing! I've been wanting to meet you for years."
"Yeah, well, nice to meet you, man," says Gerald.
"What you having? It's on me."
268
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
"Really?"
"Really, man. What brings you to these parts? I got to drive into the City to catch you playing, but hey, are you doing Stockton? Where's it gonna be?"
Gerald's stomach is grumbling, and he's got that anxious feeling he gets when he needs to eat. He cuts into his admirer's enthusiasm. "I've been driving since dawn, and I got to eat, man."
"Sure. I understand that life. You must have played Jigoku last night."
"You might say that." Gerald nods.
"What you want to eat? A burger?"
"Make that three burgers."
"What else?"
"And three milkshakes."
"Fries?"
"Large side of fries."
As you might already understand, Gerald K. Li is an outlaw who expresses himself via his instruments. Also, over time, in his association with the African American masters of the art, he's cultivated an attitude. Those fine mentors always had the least to say about anything except when acknowledging another's possible musical existence. But the enthusiastic Chinese American goes flapping on and on at the mouth while Gerald concentrates on devouring three burgers, three milkshakes, and a load of fries slathered with ketchup.
"I can't believe it. Gerald K. Li in Stockton. Hey man, we've got a club here. Nothing like in SF, but still, it's something. I play there on a regular basis. Maybe you could show up and play with us. I've been studying your style for years. I'm nothing in comparison, but well, it's embarrassing to say, but in Stockton, they call me the Gerald K. Li of Stockton. I mean, I'll never be as good, but it's like a tribute to your talents. Man, you could show up tonight, and that'd be something. Blow everyone away! It'd be an honor. I could work up a crowd. Get you some good returns. We'll pack 'em in. It'll be a major event. What do you say?"
"I could eat another burger."
"Yeah, no problem, man. No problem."
I HOTEL
269
That night, Gerald K. Li shows up at the indicated Stockton club. It's a darkened joint that reeks of smoke. Maybe there are a half-dozen folks in the audience nursing J&BS on the rocks. The Gerald K. Li of Stockton apologizes. "I been telephoning everyone, but it looks like a caravan of cars and a busload left for the City to hear Miles. Hard to compete with Miles." "Do tell."
EAGLE CLAW
MONKEY
108 points of attack 36 are secret (lethal) 72 will not kill or cripple
5 monkey types:
drunken
stone
lost
standing wooden
claw hand to lock joints
270
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
muscles pressure points
immobilize
finish
5 principals: be sly
be poisonous
be evasive
be bluffing
be unpredictable
roll and tumble relentless attack
"I'm gonna cut you some slack," says Gerald to the Stockton Gerald. "I got this extra ax I picked up in Lodi. It's yours." He's feeling generous with his collateral since, after all, there are two of them, and besides, his imitation is never gonna be able to blow out of both sides of his mouth.
Gerald is back on Ninety-nine headed toward Modesto. After that, it's Turlock, Atwater, and Merced. You'd think an outlaw taking the backroads would be safe, but there are more adventures to come. For example, he finds a cheap motel near Merced and decides to check out the extra ax he's come by. When he opens the case, it's a terrible surprise for a man who's made his kind of promises. It's filled with little bags of white powder. Oh my! In a few days, the Gerald K. Li of Stockton will get busted for possession and assaulting a pathetic white saxophone player on a Lodi roadside.
Gerald shoves the imaginary saxophone in its case under the bed and whistles out the room. At this point, Gerald could really use a drink. He heads for the corner bar under neon lights and saunters in. "What'll it be?" asks the bartender.
Gerald thinks about his promise and says, "I'll have a Coke." The bartender looks at Gerald significantly, and when Gerald bothers to look back, he freezes in shock. He's staring at his twin, his spitting image, his actual doppelganger. "Goddamn," he mutters.
I HOTEL
271
"I've been expecting you," says the bartender, pouring the Coke.
"That so?"
"That's right."
"Who do you think I am?"
"You're my twin brother, Jack."
"Jack?"
"Jack, it's you, right? Jack Sung."
"Jack Sung, the poet?"
"Don't you recognize me? I'm Joe."
"Yeah, I recognize you, but—"
"I know all about you. I've read all your poetry."
"You like poetry?"
"I don't understand poetry."
"But you read Jack's, I mean, my poetry?" Gerald scratches his head. He might as well go along with this. The way this journey's going, he couldn't be Jack, or could he?
The bartender pulls out dog-eared copies of Jack Sung's books: Cooking with Chinamen, Water Margin Memoirs, Mao and Me. He points to Mao and Me. "I don't know about the others, but I object to this one."
"Why is that?"
"That's the trouble with poets. You can't understand the work of the revolution."
Gerald remembers what Jack said when he told him he was turning over a new leaf for the revolution. "Look," he tries to explain. "I've given up women, booze, and drugs, but not my wayward ways."
The bartender doppelganger laughs. "Always trying to be rebels but ultimately you and your kind are a bunch of bourgeois intellectuals patronized by the capitalists."
Gerald shakes his head, trying to think of what Jack would say, but he can't think about any of this at all. Still, it sounds like maybe he should fight the guy.
HSING-I
5 elements:
earth
metal
water
wood
fire
WHITE CRANE
4 fists:
fast punch
block strike
circular strike
roundhouse punch
12 animals:
dragon
tiger
monkey
horse
chicken
falcon
snake
272
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
273
phoenix
lizard
swallow
eagle
bear
always defensive circling, elusive
stance:
sink to one's center of strength
30% front leg
70% rear leg
one hand lies one hand tells the truth
shape of mind
end fight quickly as started
force of opponent against himself
The bartender says, "You didn't come here to fight me, you came here to help."
Gerald says, "I did?"
"You may not be a true revolutionary, but fundamentally you believe in it."
"Maybe I do." Gerald nods.
"Don't get me wrong. You and I don't see eye to eye. Only in one thing are we alike."
"You do look like me." Gerald is still amazed at the mirror image.
"We both believe in the passionate pursuit of our ideals."
Gerald needs more time to twist his mind around this idea, but the bartender is impatient, pushes his face across the counter and growls a whisper toward Gerald's ear, "I've been hiding out here since that bank heist."
"Heist?"
"Yeah, we pulled a heist to finance the revolution."
"Oh."
"I'm prepared to take on your identity as a poet."
"We're switching?"
The bartender removes his apron and hands it to Gerald. "Wait a few days, until the coast is clear."
Gerald puts on the apron. Anything to help Jack's twin brother. He hands the bartender his motel key. "Room Twenty-one," he says. "You might take a look under the bed. Think of it as my contribution to the revolution."
"Thanks," says the former bartender, now undercover poet revolutionary.
For the next few weeks, Gerald maintains the bar under the neon sign somewhere around Merced. Big bully truckers come through. Tattooed Hell's Angels tear up the place. FBI agents try to make like they're inconspicuous. Revolutionaries posing as hippies and hippies posing as revolutionaries all try to test Gerald with the correct line. He pulls out Jack's books and reads them passages from Mao and Me.
One day, a masked stranger walks in. "Gerald K. Li," the stranger laughs. "You never even made it to Fresno, much less Bakersfield."
"Who are you?" Gerald asks cautiously.
"I'm the one who's come to take back what's mine," says the stranger.
Gerald looks closely. Is it the Lodi imposter?
"If you want your axes, they are long gone."
"Your journey down Ninety-nine has ended," says the masked stranger.
274
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I-HOTEL
275
PRAYING MANTIS
Hand moves:
mantis claw
gou
lau
tsai
qua
Ferocious self-defense
WHITE EYEBROW
soft hand Phoenix eye fist
5 external forms:
eyes
mind
hands
waist
stance
block punch pull in
off balance, strike
no mercy
5 internal forms: thrust
sink ball into water
spring forward
neutralize softly
rip shark-like
wit
Sandy Hu removes her mask, pushes her hand deep into Gerald's pockets, slips away the keys to her shiny red VDub. "Honey," she says. "I've come here to practice my imagination. Truth is beauty, and beauty is truth, and that, honey, is all you have to know. And," she continues as she turns on her heels, "this is my revolution, and don't you forget it." Like I've said, you hear us coming before you see us, and click click click, she walks out, takes her seat in the cool black leather inside that red, red exterior, and completes that journey down the rest of Highway Ninety-
276
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
277