2: Malcolm X at Bandung
Bandung was a decisive moment in the consciousness of sixty-five percent of the human race, and that moment meant: HOW
SHALL THE HUMAN RACE BE ORGANIZED?
—Richard Wright: The Color Curtain: A Report on the Bandung Conference, 1956
At Bandung all the nations came together, the dark nations of Africa and Asia. Some of them were Buddhists, some of them were Muslims, some of them were Christians, some of then were Confucianists, some were atheist. Despite their religious differences, they came together. Some were communist, some were socialists, some were capitalists—despite their economic and political differences they came together. All of them were black, brown, red or yellow.
The number-one thing that was not allowed to attend at the Bandung conference was the white man. He couldn't come. . . . And these people who came together didn't have nuclear weapons, they didn't have jet planes, they didn't have all the heavy armaments that the white man has. But they had unity....
They realized that all over the world where the dark man was being oppressed, he was being oppressed by the white man; where the dark man was being exploited, he was being exploited by the white man. So they got together on this basis—that they had a common enemy.
—Malcolm X, Message to the Grass Roots, 1963
1. Respect for fundamental human rights and for the purposes and principles of the charter of the United Nations.
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
—Final Communique, Bandung Conference, April 1955
We declare our right on this earth ... to be a human being, to be respected as a human being, to be given the rights of a human being in this society, on this earth, in this day, which we intend to bring into existence by any means necessary.
—Malcolm X
Make no mistake: El Hajj Malik Shabazz, the man we knew as Malcolm X, was not at the Bandung Conference in Indonesia in 1955. Neither was he the first African American man to set foot on Africa, nor to make his hajj to Mecca. And yet it was as if his spirit permeated these actions and events, such that others to come might measure personal accomplishments and commitments with added significance.
Similarly, Bienvenido San Pablo was, of course, not the only Fil-ipino American to participate in 1969 in the Third World Strike at the University of California at Berkeley, nor was he the first Filipino American to travel to Havana with the Brigada Venceremos.
And Olivia Wang knew nothing of poverty or racial prejudice before she, a mere high-school student of sixteen years, volunteered to work one summer in Mississippi for the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee. Again, she was neither the first nor the only Asian American to travel into the deep South to discover another country and another purpose in life.
1.4   The particulars of any event may recede to favor the idea of the event.
2. Respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all nations. —Final Communique, Bandung Conference, April 1955
I HOTEL
303
It is incorrect to classify the revolt of the Negro as simply a radical conflict of black against white or as a purely American problem. Rather, we are today seeing a global rebellion of the oppressed against the oppressor, the exploited against the exploiter.	—Malcolm X
2.1   Ben sat in the audience and marveled at the confidence of the young woman who marched to the microphone and spoke without notes, in complete sentences, with casual but forceful articulateness. She recounted her journey, her work, and the significance of her meetings and discussions with those personages of high repute: H. Rap Brown and Stokely Carmichael. She could not have been more than twenty. He noted the sheen of her hair curled behind her ear, the elegant gestures of her hands and long fingers, the sense of her stature despite her height.
At another event, Olivia heard the intensity in the voice of the young man who introduced the labor organizer from the farmworkers' movement, Philip Vera Cruz. She heard his voice, but she watched his eyes, which seemed to her almost stunning in their bright beauty, the way his look across the crowd sparkled with both kindness and fury.
2.3   First impressions may both deceive and perceive.
304
III
3. Recognition of the equality of all races and of the equality of all nations large and small.
—Final Communique, Bandung Conference, April 1955
If violence is wrong in America, violence is wrong abroad. If it is wrong to be violent defending black women and black children and black babies and black men, then it is wrong for America to draft us, and make us violent abroad in defense of her. And if it is right for America to draft us, and teach us how to be violent in defense of her, then it is right for you
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
and me to do whatever is necessary to defend our own people right here in this country.
—Malcolm X
3.1    Ben read the picket sign ahead of him. Stop the Genocide of Asian People! Below the sign, he could not mistake the flounce of her shimmering hair and that walk of almost haughty confidence.
3.2   Perhaps she felt the attention of his eyes behind her, heard them speaking to her forward movement along the street. She turned ever so slightly to acknowledge his gaze, a flash of recognition, not without a coy smile.
IV
4. Abstention from intervention or interference in the internal affairs of another country.
—Final Communique, Bandung Conference, April 1955
You can't separate the militancy that's displayed on the African continent from the militancy that's displayed right here among American blacks.... [Y]ou can't separate the African revolution from the mood of the black man in America.
—Malcolm X
4.1   Marching on the picket line at the famous Sather Gate on the University of California at Berkeley, Ben thought he saw her figure passing under Wheeler Oak, the giant oak tree whose branches spread out in thick dark arms across the cold concrete. He rushed away from his duties, his sign flapping above on its stick like a blown-out umbrella. He ran after the long hair dancing at her back, weaving through the scatter of students. He could see his breath puff into the cold morning air, calling her silently, but when he reached a certain distance, he realized it was not her.
4.2   The woman turned to see the picketer following her and abruptly turned away, perhaps in embarrassment, perhaps in fear that he
I HOTEL
305
would accost her and force her to join his protest. Her steps quickened, and he let her figure recede into the distance with the rising campanile.
4.3   He who forsakes his duties for the curiosity of a woman's hair may find himself holding a wig.
5. Respect for the right of each nation to defend itself singly or collectively, in conformity with the charter of the United Nations.	—Final Communique, Bandung
Conference, April 1955
The thing that I would like to impress upon every Afro-American leader is that no kind of action in this country is ever going to bear fruit unless that action is tied in with the overall international struggle.	—Malcolm X
5.1   At yet another political event, this time a rally in Chinatown to commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of the May 4,1919, student movement, they found themselves standing side by side.
5.2   Hey, he said. Don't I know you? His eyes twinkled, almost mischievously.
5.3   I've seen you before, she said. Her black hair swayed, back and forth. She spoke mockingly, One of those, I suppose?
5.4   One of what? he queried.
5.5   Political tourists, she sneered and walked away.
5.6   He watched her hair disappear in a swirl of red flags and the heroic fanfare of the "East is Red," the sting of her verbal jab piercing his heart in a flutter of pain and desire.
306
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
5.7   As the true intention of an act of hostility may be unknown to its perpetrator, the victim may misinterpret that act as he wishes. Flirting has its fashions.
6. (a) Abstention from the use of arrangements of collective defense to serve any particular interests of the big powers, (b) Abstention by any country from exerting pressures on other countries.	—Final Communique, Bandung
Conference, April, 1955
The white man knows what a revolution is. He knows that the Black Revolution is worldwide in scope and in nature. The Black Revolution is sweeping Asia, is sweeping Africa, is rearing its head in Latin America. The Cuban Revolution—that's a revolution. They overturned the system. Revolution is in Asia, revolution is in Africa, and the white man is screaming because he sees revolution in Latin America. How do you think he'll react to you when you learn what a real revolution is?	—Malcolm X
6.1   Ben wisely consulted the resourceful underground network of the resistance, combing through a web of rumors, layers of acquaintances, and the happenstance of knowing a fact or two. In simple truth, he confessed to his roommate: I see this girl everywhere with this incredible hair.
6.2  And his roommate said, First off, you got to call them women now.
6.3   When I find her, said Benny, I'll call her woman.
6.4   O.K., his roommate said, I'll  put out an APB on her, but I need more than
hair.
6.5   I think she's Chinese, and she's got one helluva attitude.
I HOTEL
307
6.6  When the all-points came in, his roommate said, Benny, trust me on this one. Stay away. Far away. She's way outta your league, man.
6.7   The man who sends a query to all points should not expect a unanimous or even auspicious answer from all points.
VII
7. Refraining from acts or threats of aggression or the use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any country.	—Final Communique, Bandung
Conference, April 1955
The same rebellion, the same impatience, the same anger that exists in the hearts of the dark people in Africa and Asia is existing in the hearts and minds of 20 million black people in this country who have been just as thoroughly colonized as the people in Africa and Asia.
—Malcolm X
7.1    Fluorescent lights flickered on suddenly with the closing credits of the film: One-Fourth of Humanity: The China Story by Edgar Snow, who wrote the seminal work on Red China entitled Red Star Over China.
7.2   Ben rubbed his eyes and looked around at the students in the Le Conte Hall classroom at Berkeley. He had arrived during the film, groping his way in the dark among the chairs to find an empty seat. The black-and-white footage of Edgar Snow conversing with Mao Tse-tung, both seated formally in those sofa chairs—the former a white-haired man leaning intently and the latter plumply jovial— seemed impressed on his tired retinas. Thus, when he turned to see her rising in the adjacent seat, he had a strange impression of her real presence against the ghostly flicker of the documentary.
7.3   Leaving? he asked.
7.4   Yes, if you don't mind.
308	KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
7.5	You should stay for the discussion.
7.6	Believe me, there is nothing you'II be discussing that I don't already know.
7.7	How can you be so sure, Olivia?
7.8   At the sound of her name, she glared at him. This film is a watered-down version of his book. Perhaps you should read it. She pulled the book from a small stack in her arms and shoved it at him. Now, if you'II excuse me.
7.9   Ben held the book aloft like a trophy as she exited the room, his star over China.
VIII
8. Settlement of all international disputes by peaceful means, such as negotiation, conciliation, arbitration or judicial settlement as well as other peaceful means of the parties own choice, in conformity with the charter of the United Nations. —Final Communique, Bandung Conference, April, 1955
They don't stand for anything different in South Africa than America stands for. The only difference is over there they preach as well as practice apartheid. America preaches freedom and practices slavery.
—Malcolm X
I HOTEL
309
8.1   At a meeting of the Asian American Political Alliance, Olivia stood to make her announcement. The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigations, an officious but powerful bureaucrat named J. Edgar Hoover, had testified in Congress at the House Committee on Appropriations, declaring red China to be the number-one enemy of the United States. Furthermore, three hundred thousand Chinese Americans currently living in the United States were in his view suspicious and could be involved in espionage. Their numbers were escalating yearly, to the tune of twenty thousand Chinese immigrants sent to America, no doubt as illegal agents.
8.2   Karl Kang, self-appointed to run the meeting, added comments to the effect that this sort of red scare tactic was racist and similar to the justifications for the internment of Japanese American citizens during World War II.
8.3   Olivia continued: a protest was being organized in New York at the headquarters of the FBI on East Sixty-ninth and Third Avenue. Just in case anyone was going to New York over the fall break.
8.4   After the meeting, which included a short presentation about the peasants, students, and workers in China, Ben stopped Olivia at the door, her copy of Snow's book in his hand.
8.5	Did you read it? she snapped.
8.6	To be honest, I had already read it.
8.7	Then why did you take it?
8.8	To read it again with all your notes and underlining.
8.9   She grabbed Snows book with a kind of dismay and shock, as if her mind and thoughts had been violated, as if an intricate diary of her life had been revealed in her scribbling in the reader's margins. The reader's life, captured invisibly in the dust between each turning page, is a secret.
8.10 I hope you don't mind, Ben said. I added my notes to your notes. It was Ben's turn to smile coyly and to flash his mischievous look. Where else may there be a true meeting of minds but within a book?
310
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
9. Promotion of mutual interests and cooperation.
—Final Communique, Bandung Conference, April 1955
Expand the civil-rights struggle to the level of human rights, take it into the United Nations, where our African brothers can throw their weight on our side, where our Asian brothers can throw their weight on our side, where our Latin-American brothers can throw their weight on our side, and where 800 million Chinamen are sitting there waiting to throw their weight on our side.
—Malcolm X
9.1   Ben double-parked the pickup on Kearny Street in front of the main door into the I-Hotel. He ran around to the back of the truck and yanked the gate down, exposing a load of supplies: cans of paint, rollers and brushes, tarps, coils of wire, bags of plaster, and trowels. A crew of volunteers rushed to unload the truck. Several weeks ago, there had been a fire in the hotel, and if the hotel could not be brought up to public building standards, the city had threatened to condemn the building and to evict its elderly tenants—mostly old manongs to whose lives Ben knew himself tied.
9.2   Trudging up the stairs with fresh supplies, he found Olivia on the landing, rolling swaths of bright white paint over the walls. He stood at the bottom of the steps for a moment, appreciating the red baseball cap pushed back over her hair, this time in a long, smooth pony-tail, and the smudges like war paint across her forehead and cheeks.
9.3    Well, he chortled, if it isn't Miss Know-it-all.
9.4   She ignored him, as if he were a mere working peon. It's about time you arrived. We're running out of paint, and I could use a ladder and some brushes for the detail work.
9.5   He pulled a screwdriver from his back pocket and pried open a fresh can of paint, stirred, and poured its contents into her waiting tray. He left and returned with a ladder and a small paintbrush and mustered his most degrading imitation: Will da missus be needin anytang else?
I HOTEL
311
9-6  When Olivia had climbed to the top of the ladder, he silently walked past, nudging the paint tray with his foot to position it strategically next to the bottom step of the ladder while advising her to use the wider motion of a fan to accomplish her job. Are you trying to tell me how to do my job?
9.7   No, ma'am. Uh-uh. No sirree.
9.8   Later, he smiled with pleasure, noting her left Ked, previously matching her right's red, soaked in white paint, such that it seemed glued to her sock.
9.9   One may ascend a ladder to volunteer but in descending discover the true nature of one's altruism.
10. Respect for justice and international obligations.
—Final Communique, Bandung Conference, April 1955
You can't separate peace from freedom because no one can be at peace unless he has his freedom. If you're not ready to die . for it, put the word "freedom" out of your vocabulary. Truth is on the side of the oppressed.
—Malcolm X
10.1 A car drove up to the house and honked several times. Ben looked from his window at the gold Mercedes Benz below, shrugged, and returned to his packing. When had he ever known anyone who owned such a vehicle? Janis Joplin might croon about it, but what lord would ever provide? But then came the loud pounding at his door. Ben, we're here. Let's hit the road. Ben swung open the door and ran back to the window to make sure. Shit, he said, when did you get a Benz?
10.2 His comrade, Macario Amado, explained it was the ride he'd arranged. Think of it this way, like we confiscated it from the bourgeoisie. It's like we're undercover, but shit, you still have to pay for the gas.
312
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
10.3 Ben threw his duffel and sleeping bag into the trunk and slid onto the slippery leather of the backseat. He could not mistake the silky swish of the hair or the haughty attitude of the driver who turned to greet him in dismay. You, she huffed.
10.4 What the?
10.5 You guys know each other?
10.6 There are twenty-five hundred miles between Berkeley, California, and Montreal, Canada, and traveling approximately five hundred miles per day would mean a trip of perhaps five days across the great terrain of the North American continent. Ben and Olivia may have contemplated their separate anticipations, trapped with one's neme-sis over five days on a road trip of twenty-five hundred miles but, after all, headed for the Hemispheric Conference to End the Vietnam War. The South Vietnamese National Liberation Front and the Democratic Republic of Vietnam would send their representatives. Their alliance must also be present to align itself with the non-aligned Third World.
10.7 The personal must be put aside for the political.
I HOTEL
313