1972: Inter-national Hotel
1: The Art of War
I came here with many friends
and remember those fabled months and years
of study. We were young, sharp as flower wind, ripe, candid with a scholar's bright blade
and unafraid. We pointed our finger at China.
—Mao Tse-tung (Changsha)
People who come out of prison can build up the country. Misfortune is a test of people's fidelity. Those who protest at injustice are people of true merit. When the prison doors are opened, the real dragon will fly out.
—Ho Chi Minh, Word-Play
I HOTEL
295
All men are created equal; they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights; among these are Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness.
—Ho Chi Minh, Declaration of Independence of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
1.1    She said: I am the indelible voice, returned to pay tribute to the lives of young revolutionaries. Who are these young men and women who sacrifice their youth for a new idea of the future? New idea of the future? In ten thousand years, what futures have blossomed and withered again and again, with generation after generation, each as hopeful as the former, each a whisper in time. I, too, was once so young.
1.2   Young woman: Olivia Wang was the daughter of a high-ranking family and a young woman for whom every consideration had been carefully measured. Her grandfather, a failed generalissimo, believed fervently in the promise of his progeny, fed his children with the ire of his misfortune, the fall of a great lord who could only pass the legacy of a family history that would not simply end with his escape. Every child, then, must be raised as a potential weapon, their minds honed to steel swords, their bodies made muscular beneath the graceful inscrutability of a skillful diplomat. So tutored, Olivia moved through any space with the glint of her privilege cast from her shoulders like sharp stings, but perhaps this was but a shallow performance for, in truth, the generalissimo escaped to exile, but his children escaped to freedom.
1.3   Young man: Bienvenido San Pablo, known simply as Ben San Pablo, was the grandson of a manong. It is true that to attain the honored status of a manong meant many years of struggle and survival, the plodding trek that followed the long Pacific coast from the Imperial Valley, stooping under a savage desert sun to pick fields of netted cantaloupe, to the shadow of Mount McKinley, gripping the frozen handle of a knife to slash the pink bellies of a thousand wild salmon. Ben knew that the life of his grandfather had been passed to his
296
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
father, who would also one day be known as manong. But if manong is a title given to an honored elder, must it also be accompanied by the same passage through years of hardship and backbreaking labor? If Ben could find another path across his future, must he then relinquish this honored title?
II
The art of war is of vital importance to the State. —Sun Tzu
2.1   An unlikely pair these two, Olivia and Ben, or as they were known, Olie and Benny, who in time met, found love, and joined their destinies one to the other. In another time and place, such a union would have been impossible, for such mixing of class and tribal identities should have been taboo. But these were times of war, and in war, the impossible becomes possible if only because the stakes are higher and there is nothing to lose.
2.2  Love in service of the revolution is a great love indeed.
III
All warfare is based on deception. —Sun Tzu
If war brought Olivia and Ben together, would peace then pull them apart? For the young, seven years might seem an eternity, but for those who live seven years, it is finally only a beginning, and the promises of seven years stretch out into multiples of seven until youth crumbles into age, grasping for a revaluation that desires once again a blank slate, the sloughing of cares piled one upon the other, the emptiness of freedom.
Ben pondered the constant warfare within his mind, the hidden mines that seemed to explode at every venture made through that dark labyrinth. Had not his heroes, Lenin and Marx, already cleared a path to light? Why was it, then, that his vision could only navigate through the clarity of a white opiate?
3.3   Nightly, Olivia dreamed about the floating child within her, its features morphing from those of Benny with his bright burning eyes, to
I HOTEL
297
a fat baby-face of Chairman Mao, to the stern features of her grandfather, the generalissimo. She woke in a frantic sweat and stumbled with her full belly from her bed to relieve her heavy bladder.
3.4   The political training of the mind wars constantly with its psychological training, pushing it to one side or the other but never replacing it completely. The mind is a vessel of wisdom, deception, and dreams.
5.2   Of course, the Chairman had something else in mind when he opined that one should learn to play the piano, but Ben also heard the old melodies that he had abandoned for the revolution, and he felt them pushing through his very fingers toward the keys, a dormant life awaking in the realization of his son.
5.3   A man may teach the revolution to a people, but what revolution must he teach to his own son?
IV
Investigation may be likened to the long months of pregnancy, and solving a problem to the day of birth. —Mao Tse-tung
4.1   On the contrary, pregnancy cannot be likened to investigation, and no problem is solved on the day of birth.
4.2   Olivia drew her small bundle to her breast—his miniature fists pumping, his tiny open mouth searching for its beacon. She felt the glands within her release, gushing forth, seeming at first to drown the baby, but then, their bodies united. They gave and took in unison, the greedy baby, the provident breast.
4.3   Ben observed this world closed on itself, completely self-satisfied, and grasped at a meaning of his son's hunger and survival. The more the baby fed, the more Olivia would produce. Benny smiled and announced gleefully: This is a clear example of controlling the means of production.
4.4   Olivia sneered, What bullshit.
Learn to "play the piano."
—Mao Tse-tung
5.1   When the boy, whom they named Malcolm, was one year old, Ben
sat with him on his lap at the piano, pressing the keys one by one.
•  This is the center of the keyboard, he said. This is the middle C. This is
the scale up and down, up and down. You must learn to play with all
ten fingers.
VI
A revolution is not a dinner party, or writing an essay, or painting a picture, or doing embroidery; it cannot be so refined, so leisurely and gentle, so temperate, kind, courteous, restrained and magnanimous. A revolution is an insurrection, an act of violence by which one class overthrows another. —Mao Tse-tung
6.1   An unmarked car with four men inside rolled slowly down the street. Olivia could feel the eyes of the men mark her gait along the sidewalk. She turned to look and thought she saw the tip of a gun resting across the window. Suddenly, two of the men charged out of the car from the backseat, but she screamed the scream she had trained her voice to throw, the terrorized voice of a woman in dire straits. The voice alone paralyzed the men, but she threw a back punch into the throat of one and slipped from their grip, a slimy fish, racing away down the street screaming, escaping.
6.2   Unfortunately, the same men succeeded in grabbing another of their cadre, accused her of possession of an unregistered weapon, rifled through her purse, confiscating an address book. Who are Benny and Olie? the police of the Red Squad questioned. Later, this cadre phoned from jail and warned Ben at home, who at the same moment heard the knock on the door, grabbed Malcolm, and escaped through the backyard, scaling a fence with a clinging toddler at his hip.
6.3   Olivia phoned home from a booth on the street and heard the answering voice of a strange man. She asked coolly, Is Malcolm there?
298
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
299
The voice answered, No, he's at work. Can you leave a message? That won't be necessary, she replied.
VII
Individualism spawns hundreds of dangerous diseases: bureaucratism, commandism, sectarianism, subjectiveness, corruption, waste. . . . Individualism is the cruel enemy of socialism. The revolutionary must do away with it.
—Ho Chi Minh
It was Ben who noticed the change. What is it, Olie? You need to eat. You're losing weight. You need to quit that kung fu stuff.
It's not kung fu, Benny. I don't have time for that. My back just hurts, and I'm bloated. Maybe 'm lactose intolerant.
Getting to be an old lady, he snickered.
I cant go to that meeting tonight. Tm so tired.
Burned out? he taunted.
Bullshit.
You have a fever, he worried.
VIII
If you know the enemy and know yourself, you need not fear the result of a hundred battles.
—Sun Tzu
Olivia said plainly, My sister told my parents, and they paid for the tests.
What tests? asked Ben.
Blood tests. Other tests that say I have ovarian cancer.
IX
The intellectuals can overcome their shortcomings only in mass struggles over a long period.
—MaoTse-tung
300
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
9.1   Benny, she said from her bed, you're a lousy revolutionary, and only I know it. I should bring it up before the central committee and have your ass blasted.
9.2   He laughed, looked up from his book. You know Tm only in this because I like to read.
9.3	You love the idea of the revolutionary.
9.4	It's a good idea. A very good idea, you know.
9.5	Like hell it is, she said.
x
If you want knowledge, you must take part in the practice of changing reality. If you want to know the taste of a pear, you •   must change the pear by eating it yourself.
—Mao Tse-tung
10.1 Ben did not reply because he feared what was to come, the absence of his partner in revolution, the woman at his side who, offered her energy and her skills as the practitioner of his theorizing. What sort of ideologue would he become without his intelligent and practicing believer?
10.2 For every Marx, there must be a Lenin, or a Che, or a Ho, or a Mao.
XI
... the East Wind is prevailing over the West Wind.
—Mao Tse-tung
n.i  But she said: I have anticipated the end of the story without first imparting the beginning. Knowing the story's end does not necessarily imply completion or knowledge, for if many endings are possible, so also are many beginnings. History may proceed sequentially or, as they say, must proceed sequentially, but stories may turn and turn again—the knowing end kissing the innocent beginning, the innocent end kissing the knowing beginning.
I HOTEL
3OI