9.2   Yoko Smith married her high-school boyfriend, Jack, right out of high school and just before he was drafted and shipped out, Private Jack Smith, to defend American freedom in Vietnam. In a period of less than three months, she changed from Miss Yoko Sakamoto to Mrs. Jack Smith to Mrs. Yoko Smith, widow. A photograph in the high-school yearbook shows Yoko as homecoming queen in gold crown and pink gown, a reclining odalisque held aloft by the entire football team. After Jack's final salute into the patriotic heavens, each of his team buddies came around to console his grieving widow and to get some piece of the action that Jack had once kept for himself all senior year. By the time Yoko woke from her grief, she had tried to commit suicide, self-inflict an abortion that resulted in a miscarriage with permanent damage to her uterus, and was working through a drug rehabilitation program. Propped up on white sheets in a sterile hospital room, she flipped through Life magazine and stared in horror, humiliation, and self-recognition at the running figure of a naked weeping girl stripped by napalm.
9.3   If beauty is in the eye of the beholder, so too the ugly, but what of terror and atrocity?
x
There are well over 600 million workers, peasants and soldiers in our country, whereas there are only a handful of landlords, rich peasants, counter-revolutionaries, bad elements, rightists, and bourgeois elements. Shall we serve this handful, or the 600 million?	—Chiang Ching
10.1 Revolutionary sisters, like interchanging stars, floated into a small but growing constellation, tugged into variable patterns of revolutionary commitment: health care, child care, bilingual education, shelters, drug rehabilitation, counseling, co-ops, labor unions, political organization, party formation. Olivia was at the head of the phone tree. The meetings were nightly. The work was urgent.
10.2 Revolutionaries are not determined by sex.
336	KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
5: On Colonialism
Then they put a treacherous big viper on your chest: On your neck they laid the yoke of fire-water, They took your sweet wife for glitter and cheap pearls, Your incredible riches that nobody could measure.
—Patrice Lumumba, Dawn in the Heart of Africa
1.1    Ben San Pablo was named after his father, Bienvenido San Pablo, Sr., a strong muscular man of broad shoulders and deep voice, a tough, bold exterior fortified nightly by the golden flame lit within an amber bottle of whiskey. There was no earthly weight that Bienvenido Senior could not lift, no woman he could not charm, no comrade from whom he did not receive respect. And yet a great weight surrounded his heart like a lead suitcase, an unattainable woman sneered blue cat eyes in his dreams, a great white father reminded him constantly of his place. Thus a great man was a cripple in his own mind, uncontrollably jealous of the women with whom he became attached such that his paranoia and self-doubt eventually drove each of them away, and though a respected foreman at his job, he spent all his additional pay buying drinks and loaning money to his working crew to assure himself of their friendship and continued loyalty.
1.2   A man's self-worth can only be measured by himself.
Raving mad I greet you with my ravings whiter than death. —Aime Cesaire, Raving Mad
2.1   Ben San Pablo, Jr., spent his teenage years running with a white crowd. After all, was not his mother, the second wife of Bienvenido
I HOTEL
337
Senior, a white woman, whose marriage to a Filipino man had cast her from her family? By his senior year in high school, Ben realized that no manner of assimilation or integration would erase his dark features, which were smuggled in with those of his mother. He began to see himself mirrored in disinterest, curiosity, rejection, or patronizing humor, but nothing that a couple of beers or a whiff of pot couldn't resolve for the time being.
2.2   Yet he argued with his mother who, when Bienvenido Senior's third wife up and left him, began to bring her ex-husband his evening meals. Why are you doing this for that Filipino drunkard? Ben yelled at his mother. Because, she said, that Filipino is your father. At that moment, Ben recognized in himself his father's self-hate and his own deep shame.
2.3   It is possible to destroy or avoid all mirrors, but only the blinding of one's own vision may destroy the seeing reflection of another.
III Long, long have you held between your hands the
black face of the warrior
Held as if already there fell on it a twilight of death. From the hill I have seen the sun set in the bays of
your eyes. When shall I see again, my country, the pure
horizon of your face? When shall I sit down once more at the dark table
of your breast?    —Leopold Sedar Senghor, Songs for Signare
Karl Kang, our mentor, who would father a new generation of revolutionaries, was himself a rebellious son in exile, a philosophical genius, married to a black American who skillfully made his graduate research, teaching, and revolutionary thinking possible by her impeccable household, her careful planning and budgeting, her excellent cooking, her sweet Southern mothering, and her steady secretarial salary.
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
3.2   One day, the study group arrived at the Berkeley apartment to find that the hot pot of coffee had not been brewed, nor was there a plate of homemade cookies on the coffee table. Instead, dirty clothes were strewn about the apartment, along with Kang's papers and books and piles of cigarette butts in scattered ashtrays. Delias taken a vacation, Karl apologized, but then, her vacation seemed to linger on and on for weeks and months and then years.
3.3   Delia used to joke that she had married North Korea, and Karl, that he had married Africa. What sort of marriage was that? Delia wanted Asian contemplation. Karl wanted negritude. Marriage was a new beginning equal to a romantic reading of the destructive nature of war: a tabula rasa. They both stared into their desires, she colonizing her dream man, he, his dream woman. In time, it was as an armed struggle necessary for independence.
... the national liberation of a people is the regaining of the historical personality of that people, its return to history through the destruction of the imperialist domination to which it was subjected. —Amilcar Cabral, The Weapon of
Theory Havana, 1966, Triconti-
nental
4.1   In 1942, Bienvenido Senior volunteered for the First All-Filipino Infantry Regiment, shipped off from Salinas, California, back to defend his homeland, but although through the act of war he returned an American citizen, he never spoke of the battles, the memory of dragging his dying brother, slimy with his blood, through mud and swamp, the horror of returning to the decimation of his family village, the pain of having to return to tell his mother the awful truth of her dead son and their lost people. He could not understand why he had survived, and he lived the guilt of that realization every day of his life. His was the lost history of seven thousand men, many engaged in espionage to infiltrate local villages, the covert and treacherous activities of spies, secret stories of stealth to create the conditions for victory.
I HOTEL
339
4.2   The mask of race often hides the true hero, thus obliterating his participation in any history.
Before it can adopt a positive voice, freedom requires an effort at dis-alienation. At the beginning of his life a man is always clotted, he is drowned in contingency. The tragedy of the man is that he was once a child.
—Frantz Fanon, Black Skin, White Masks
5.1    Ben Junior entered college only to change his major along with his future plans every semester. In the next four years he would not accumulate sufficient credits in any area of study to justify under any bureaucratic or scholastic regimen the honor of a graduation ticket. And it was not as if he were a bourgeois son with certain prospects of employment; he had always had to work to support himself. He was in fact a true lover of learning, a bookworm, even a kind of young pedant, who roamed the library reading everything parallel to and intersecting with his studies. His absorption of any subject was a joy to his teachers, but there was no one area of inquiry that kept his attention. He was a migrant scholar moving from job to job, harvesting this, fishing that, gambling his future. No one in his family had ever gone to college.
5.2   His friends, and Karl Kang (who became his mentor) in particular, found this flitting from subject to subject a kind of innocent cavorting of a prodigious mind, recognized the playfulness of creative genius. Could his scholastic irresponsibility be channeled for a greater purpose?
5.3    Kang realized over time that no sort of professionalization could corral Ben's talents, and moaned to him: You'd make a lousy lawyer. You cant just turn around midway and send the ball to the opponent's goal. You've got to use that kind of strategizing for your own team.
5.4   To which Ben replied: My team was losing anyway. My team is a/ways losing.
340
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
5.5    That's the point. Your team is the underdog.
5.6   It was also true that Kang would make a lousy lawyer.
VI
"You think, therefore you are a thinker. You are one-who-thinks, white-creature-in-pith-helmet-in-African-jungle-who-thinks and, finally, white-man-who-has-problems-believing-in-his-own-existence." (mythical brother innocent to Descartes)	—Wole Soyinka, Myth, Literature,
and the African World
6.1   Karl Kang was hard at work on his political thesis regarding black nationalism when Delia came away from her spiritual meditations, pushed his papers away, and grabbed his crotch. This they knew was the best part of being married, this synthesis of their contradictions, his shimmying buttocks, her ample breasts, his strong arms and nimble hands, her wide lips. Race is a category, he whispered to her as he dug himself into the black soil of her rising rhythms. Return to nothingness, she rasped, rubbing his penis into a frenzy, clawing his hairless back, biting Buddha's nipples, drawing blood.
6.2   After, he spoke carelessly to her in Korean, and she answered unknowingly in Creole.
6.3   It may not be possible to cure the crazy ethnic, neither with the medicine of politics nor the medicine of culture.
VII
At Bandung, to the astonishment and embarrassment of leftists all over the world, one of the two fundamental principles of the conference was religion.
—Albert Memmi, The Colonizer and the Colonized
7.1   When the epiphany came as it tends to near the end of one's life, Bienvenido Senior saw his dead mother in a wreath of light at the
I HOTEL
foot of his bed and, fearing for his life, followed her out of his house in Daly City, along the silent avenues, and into a grocery market, losing her somewhere among the fruits and vegetables. Standing there barefoot and stupidly in his pajamas at three in the morning, he wept into the broccoli and the cantaloupe, the memory of her toil spreading like those fields in a tarmac of blinding light.
7.2   Ben had begun bringing his mother's meals to his father, trying to arrive before his father could hit the evening bottle, and holding forth with a planned question. But the next night, his father said: I saw your grandmother last night. You dont have to worry about me. I know what I have to do now.
7.3   Bienvenido Senior went to church, made his confession, tossed his whiskey habit, and organized a plan to build a new church in his old village.
7.4   Years later, Ben Junior would travel to the Philippines to visit his father, buried next to the church he had struggled to build with his bare hands during those years of martial law. Ben lit a candle in the church and sat to contemplate the rebellious zeal of their separate passions.
VIII
I was made, by the law, a criminal, not because of what I had done, but because of what I stood for, because of what I thought, because of my conscience. Can it be any wonder to anybody that such conditions make a man an outlaw of society?
—Nelson Mandela, Pretoria Court, November 1962
8.1   Ben San Pablo, Jr., saw his father off at the airport. He asked his mother, who waved at his side: Why don't you go with him? She shook her head. He must go by himself. She squeezed Ben's hand. You'II understand one day, she said, when you, too, are free.
8.2   The next day, Ben took speed, read Das Kapital cover to cover, and joined the Brigada Venceremos.
342
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
6: A Romance for Humanity
I am First Lady by accident. I was not elected by the people, but here I am.	—Imelda Marcos
So it was that as Ferdinand Marcos dipped his pen into the blood of his people, a revolutionary marriage was consummated.
1.2   The Occidentals say that all tragedy ends in death, all comedy in marriage, but what of a divine comedy, a marriage that anticipates its death, a romantic journey into purgatory, Dante pursuing his Beatrice, Orpheus his Eurydice? And what if the beautiful muse is Revolution herself?
WHEREAS, on the basis of carefully evaluated and verified information, it is definitely established that lawless elements . . . are actually staging, undertaking and waging an armed insurrection and rebellion against the Government of the Republic of the Philippines ...
II
I'm like Robin Hood. I rob the rich to make these projects come alive ... not really rob. It's done with a smile. —Imelda Marcos
2.1   It is said that Marcos signed his proclamation on September seventeenth, dated it the twenty-first, and announced it on the twenty-third. The dictator enacting evil vainly looks for the auspicious will of the stars.
2.2   Coincidentally, Ben and Olivia announced their marriage on the seventeenth, formalized it at city hall on the twenty-first, and celebrated the wedding on the twenty-third.
I HOTEL
343