25.2 Tucked into their single room, Olivia handed Ben a gift, a wrapped shoebox. I've been saving this for you. She smiled. Guess what it is.
25.3 Too light for a gun, he quipped.
25.4 Ripping it open, he pulled from the tissue paper the right side of a worn shoe, its rubber sole, red canvas, and laces caked in the white paint of the I-Hotel.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed. Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy two.
FERDINAND E. MARCOS
President
Republic of the Philippines
358
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
7: National Liberation
... the concept of competition belongs to a world of hunger, because competition belongs to an underdeveloped world, because competition belongs to a world where hunger and poverty have become institutions . . . you have been forging your own revolutionary consciousness ... you have been helping to create the material base that along with education and consciousness will allow us to live according to truly communist norms, that is, according to truly fraternal norms, truly human norms, in which each man and woman will see others as his brothers and sisters ... we have seen what can be done through human collectivity; we have seen what you have been able to accomplish in three months, a small army of young people working here enthusiastically, because you did not see work as a punishment, but rather as an ennobling activity, one that inspires man, that can fill him with happiness. That is work when it is not slave work; that is work when man is not exploited.... The plants that you have sown here will remain on the earth; your example will remain with our youth; and the heartening response of the new revolutionary generation will remain with our revolution.
—Fidel Castro, April 29,1967
Let us speak of the sugar cane itself, rising in great clustering mastheads from the rich red earth, jointed like bamboo, stalks progressing from murky reds and purplish yellows to the green-grass spray at their waving peaks.
And to the people who cut the cane, who walked into its green moisture at dawn to level the fields with their swiping machetes, the instructions were simple:
I HOTEL
359
1.3    Approach the cane with a firm grasp on your machete and swipe the stalk at its base, severing the cane at the ground. Hack the cane in half. Cut away the leafy top. Do not stand so as to cut your own leg. Achieve a technique so that your body creates a rhythm, so that your body becomes as a machine.
1.4   Forget that your hands and wrists will swell and blister; that you will soon be covered in tiny cuts from your own machete and from the cane's sharp leaves; that your skin will redden, then turn to deep brown from the intense sun; that sweat will pour from your body and reside in soiled puddles in your dusty clothing. Forget the one million arroba mark promised to the revolution. Forget that you will cut cane next to the most worthy of your comrades, the Brigada Boliviano, the Brigada Vietnamita, next to men who fought with Fidel, or even next to Fidel himself.
1.5    However, it was not the strenuous insistence of backbreaking and tedious labor alongside his comrades Cubanos that impressed Ben San Pablo; it was instead their deep love for Cuba. There was no way to get around it. He did not love the place of his birth, and every one of his companions Americanos also only expressed hatred for their imperialist homeland. And among themselves, the hostilities between the Third and the white worlds were hidden from their Cuban hosts. How then would they ever return to wage a revolution?
1.6   He tried to explain his concern to Olivia. It's like Che said: the true revolutionary is guided by strong feelings of love.
1.7    Oh Benny, get over it.
II
What a luminous, near future would be visible to us if two, three or many Vietnams appeared throughout the world with their share of death and immense tragedies, their everyday heroism and repeated blows against imperialism, obliging it to disperse its forces under the attack and increasing hatred of all the peoples of the earth! . . . If we, those of us who on a
360
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
small point of the world map, fulfill our duty and place at the disposal of this struggle whatever little we are able to give— our lives, our sacrifice—must someday breathe our last breath in any land not our own yet already ours, sprinkled with our blood, let it be known that we have measured the scope of our actions and that we consider ourselves no more than elements in the great army of the proletariat . . .
—Ernesto Che Guevara, Message to the Tricontinental, April 1967
2.1   What is the duty of the revolutionary if not to make the revolution? Should the revolutionary hunker down on constant watch, the posted guard ever ready with the appropriate armory and flags and drums for the eventuality of the uprising spurred by the grand announcement of imperial death? Or should the revolutionary, like his counterpart mole in the Federal Bureau of Investigations, study the evidence with meticulous insistence, drafting and redrafting the intricate puzzles of conspiracies, creating counter-conspiracies and confusion to anticipate the moment of revolution? Or should the revolutionary, knowing the inevitability of the demise of his enemy, percolate ideas into the populace until such a time when such brewed ideas will caffeinate the minds of all? Men of action with their short lives, typically from ages seventeen to twenty-seven, have no such luxury. Yet some push on doggedly until the age of thirty-nine.
2.2   What is the revolutionary if not the revolution itself, the insurrectionary focus, the revolutionary condition, the incendiary spark? History has shown that on an island, it may be only six men; in a small country, a force of one hundred; in a country of eight hundred million, eight thousand will do.
2.3    We may have to plan, said Ben, for the possibility of an insurrection in which we hold out in the I-Hotel.
2.4   You know we have our stash hidden, suggested a member. We could easily funnel it into the hotel, arm the place to the teeth. Once under attack, we could draw all of Chinatown in, set up multiple operational bases.
I HOTEL
36
2.5   Olivia appeared in the doorway in the full bloom of her pregnant self, tapping her living belly as she spoke. What kind of bullshit are you talking? Have you asked the tenants? These guys'll kick you out on your revolutionary asses. Have you even asked Chinatown ? Ask me. I work in Chinatown.
2.6   The continued belief in the heroic individual who can change the course of history is a contradictory although romantic message to the collective cause. How many Ches will it take? Is the revolutionary dead? Who then will come forward in our time of great need?
2.7   Function may make the functionary, but only the historic individual may make history.
III
It is absolutely essential that the oppressed participate in the revolutionary process with an increasingly critical awareness of their role as Subjects of the transformation ... if they come to power still embodying that ambiguity imposed on them by the situation of oppression—it is my contention that they will merely imagine they have reached power. Their existential duality may even facilitate the rise of a sectarian climate leading to the installation of bureaucracies which undermine the revolution. ... They may aspire to revolution as a means of domination, rather than as a road to liberation.
—Paulo Freire, Pedagogy of the Oppressed
3.1    Karl Kang had argued: This is not Cuba. The material conditions are not ripe in the u.s. You are working against a majority that represents a basically provincial American state of monolingual people. Even if you mobilize the working class, they don't give a damn about the Third World or blacks, much less Asians. It may take many years, most likely not in our lifetimes.
3.2   Olivia argued: Through our mass work, we can speed things up, but we need direction.
362
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
3.3    Ben argued: Others are organizing as we speak. If we don't delineate a
clear line, we'll lose our voice.
3.4   Whatever line you take, said Kang, your success will pivot around the categories of race.
3.5   Macario Amado stood at the bottom steps in front of the J-Town Collective on Sutter. It was his turn to do security. Down the street, Angela Davis sat in a car with three bodyguards, waiting. Suddenly two women erupted from the building, arguing.
3.6   Olivia said, This may be a joint meeting, but we didn't agree to bring Angela.
3.7	The other woman said, This was an opportunity that came up.
3.8	You know we're aligned with Mao, and she's CP with the Soviets.
3.9	That's not why she's been invited. She's not coming to discuss our lines.
3.10 Well, she should, because I just read your position paper, and theoretically, it's pretty weak. With a position like that, you're bound to lose cadre.
3.11 Listen, this is not a closed meeting over lines. It's a mass meeting, so bringing Angela is part of educating the masses. We've got a packed room up there, waiting to meet her.
3.12 This is what you call mass work? Aiko, everyone knows that you re not doing mass work. You're just trying to get your crim degree.
3.13 Two of Angela's guards emerged from the car and approached Macario. Ah, say man, we can't have Angela waiting in the car like this. You have to let us know what's going down.
3.14 By this time the argument between the two women was "fucking bitch" this and that, so Angela's guards said to Macario, Later, man.
I HOTEL
363
Later, agreed Macario, watching the car speed away with the signature shadow of Angela's perfect natural.
3.15 The purest definition of the vanguard is as a fighting unit in armed struggle without which no vanguard may become a vanguard, in which case the struggle over its political life and organization may become an end in itself. High revolutionary fervor may be inversely proportional to a situation that is not in fact revolutionary.
IV
... Chile now faces the need to initiate new methods of constructing a socialist society. Our revolutionary method, the pluralist method, was anticipated by the classic Marxist theorists but never before put into practice.... Today Chile is the first nation on earth to put into practice the second model of transition to a socialist society. . . . The skeptics and the prophets of doom will say that it is not possible. They will say that a parliament that has served the ruling classes so well cannot be transformed into the Parliament of the Chilean People. Further, they have emphatically stated that the Armed Forces and Corps of Carabineros, who have up to the present supported the institutional order that we wish to overcome, would not consent to guarantee the will of the people if these should decide on the establishment of socialism in our country. They forget the patriotic conscience of the Armed Forces and the Carabineros, their tradition of professionalism and their obedience to civil authority.
—Salvador Allende, First Message to Congress, May 21,1971
4.1   Olivias words came between breaths. I hate to admit this, Benny, but if Allende couldn't do it, how can it be done?
4.2   We've got to learn from this. Failure can be a springboard.
4.3   Oh, oh, oh, bullshit. She was breathing hard.
364	KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
4.4   Ben peered with the midwife between Olivias thighs. Are you concentrating? he admonished Olivia.
4.5    Cant you tell? This is how T'm concentrating, she groaned. But while we're learning, the enemy is also learning. Ohhhhh, Benny, we're not naming this baby Salvador.
4.6   Olie, it's got a shitload of hair! It's time to push!
4.7   Tm tired, Benny. I don't know if I can do this anymore.
4.8   Olie, this is no time to give up. Push!
4.9   What's that smell from the kitchen? Olivia grimaced.
4.10 It's the manong. He's frying chicken.
4.11 It's making me sick.
4.12 You're going to be really hungry after this. Come on, Olie, push!
4.13 The manong came across the hall with two long bamboo chopsticks, parting the small crowd waiting patiently at the door, and stuck his head in. How's it going? he queried.
4.14 Push! shouted Ben.
4.15 Push! shouted the manong. Push! joined in the enthusiastic crowd in the hallway.
4.16 Olie, it's a boy!
4.17 It's a boy! repeated everyone in the hallway. And this was repeated to everyone in the stairwell and passed out a window to everyone in the street. Below their window, a band started up a raucous serenade.
4.18 Olie, it's not over yet, you gotta push out the placenta.
4.19 The manong clacked his chopsticks. No problem. You pass that pla--centa to me. I tell you, the oil's perfect!
I HOTEL
365
