foot of his bed and, fearing for his life, followed her out of his house in Daly City, along the silent avenues, and into a grocery market, losing her somewhere among the fruits and vegetables. Standing there barefoot and stupidly in his pajamas at three in the morning, he wept into the broccoli and the cantaloupe, the memory of her toil spreading like those fields in a tarmac of blinding light.
7.2   Ben had begun bringing his mother's meals to his father, trying to arrive before his father could hit the evening bottle, and holding forth with a planned question. But the next night, his father said: I saw your grandmother last night. You dont have to worry about me. I know what I have to do now.
7.3   Bienvenido Senior went to church, made his confession, tossed his whiskey habit, and organized a plan to build a new church in his old village.
7.4   Years later, Ben Junior would travel to the Philippines to visit his father, buried next to the church he had struggled to build with his bare hands during those years of martial law. Ben lit a candle in the church and sat to contemplate the rebellious zeal of their separate passions.
VIII
I was made, by the law, a criminal, not because of what I had done, but because of what I stood for, because of what I thought, because of my conscience. Can it be any wonder to anybody that such conditions make a man an outlaw of society?
—Nelson Mandela, Pretoria Court, November 1962
8.1   Ben San Pablo, Jr., saw his father off at the airport. He asked his mother, who waved at his side: Why don't you go with him? She shook her head. He must go by himself. She squeezed Ben's hand. You'II understand one day, she said, when you, too, are free.
8.2   The next day, Ben took speed, read Das Kapital cover to cover, and joined the Brigada Venceremos.
342
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
6: A Romance for Humanity
I am First Lady by accident. I was not elected by the people, but here I am.	—Imelda Marcos
So it was that as Ferdinand Marcos dipped his pen into the blood of his people, a revolutionary marriage was consummated.
1.2   The Occidentals say that all tragedy ends in death, all comedy in marriage, but what of a divine comedy, a marriage that anticipates its death, a romantic journey into purgatory, Dante pursuing his Beatrice, Orpheus his Eurydice? And what if the beautiful muse is Revolution herself?
WHEREAS, on the basis of carefully evaluated and verified information, it is definitely established that lawless elements . . . are actually staging, undertaking and waging an armed insurrection and rebellion against the Government of the Republic of the Philippines ...
II
I'm like Robin Hood. I rob the rich to make these projects come alive ... not really rob. It's done with a smile. —Imelda Marcos
2.1   It is said that Marcos signed his proclamation on September seventeenth, dated it the twenty-first, and announced it on the twenty-third. The dictator enacting evil vainly looks for the auspicious will of the stars.
2.2   Coincidentally, Ben and Olivia announced their marriage on the seventeenth, formalized it at city hall on the twenty-first, and celebrated the wedding on the twenty-third.
I HOTEL
343
2.3   The twenty-first was a Thursday.
WHEREAS, these lawless elements ... have committed and still are committing, acts of violence, depredations, sabotage and injuries against our duly constituted authorities, against the members of our law enforcement agencies, and worst of all, against the peaceful members of our society ...
It's the rich you can terrorize. The poor have nothing to lose.
—Imelda Marcos
3.1   The wedding invitations went out over the phone tree and as flyers posted all over Manilatown and Chinatown. The flyers' graphics matched the murals over the I-Hotel, strong-fisted people proclaiming a wedding of the people.
WHEREAS, in the fanatical pursuit of their conspiracy and widespread acts of violence, depredations, sabotage and injuries against our people ... these lawless elements have in fact organized, established and are now maintaining a Central Committee ...
IV
People say Mrs. Marcos is a great dreamer. Oh, yes, I dream not only at night when there is the moon and the stars, but I dream more so during the daytime without the moon and the stars. But I don't just dream. I do it. I'm an activist.
—Imelda Marcos
4.1   The old lounge of the I-Hotel had to be scrubbed down, polished, and spiffed up for the occasion. Flowers and ribbons were laced about the room. Tables were spread with long cloths borrowed from a Chinese restaurant. Someone commandeered a red carpet and rolled it from the lounge to the front entryway. Tenants and activists scrambled to dress up the old hotel and finally themselves for the big day.
344
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
4.2   All day and night the smell of baking and roasting and stir-frying wafted through the hallways from every kitchen.
4.3   The old hotel, almost condemned, puffed itself up like a decrepit old Cinderella transformed by a dream.
WHEREAS, in order to carry out... their premeditated plan to stage, undertake and wage a full scale armed insurrection and rebellion in this country, these lawless elements have organized, established and are now maintaining a well trained, well armed and highly indoctrinated and greatly expanded insurrectionary force, popularly known as the "New People's Army" ...
It is terribly important to do certain things, such as wear over-embroidered dresses. After all, the mass follows class. Class never follows mass.	—Imelda Marcos
5.1    Olivia wore a red silk Mao jacket and matching pants, her hair braided with flowers down her back.
5.2   Ben wore a white embroidered barong and his best shoes.
WHEREAS, these lawless elements, their cadres, fellow-travelers, friends, sympathizers and supporters have for many years up to the present time been mounting sustained, massive and destructive propaganda assaults ... have so eroded and weakened the will of our people to sustain and defend our government and our democratic way of life ...
VI
Sometimes you have smart relatives who can make it. My dear, there are always people who are just a little faster, more brilliant, and more aggressive.
—Imelda Marcos
I HOTEL
345
6.1   Ben's stepbrother by his father's first marriage and Macario Amado were his best men.
6.2   Olivia's younger sister plus her seven revolutionary sisters were her best ladies.
WHEREAS, these lawless elements having taken up arms against our duly constituted government... to the great detriment, suffering, injury and prejudice of our people and the nation and to generate a deep psychological fear and panic among our people ...
VII
I am my little people's star and slave. When I go out into the barrios, I get dressed because I know my little people want to see a star. Other presidents' wives have gone to the barrios wearing house dresses and slippers. That's not what people want to see. People want someone they can love, someone to set an example.	—Imelda Marcos
7.1   The wedding march, a scratchy recording of the full orchestral version of the Chinese opera Internationale, blasted triumphantly from loudspeakers.
WHEREAS, the Supreme Court... has found that in truth and in fact there exists an actual insurrection and rebellion in the country by a sizeable group of men who have publicly risen in arms to overthrow the government...
VIII
I understand my people better than anyone. I study them all the time and even conduct experiments.
—Imelda Marcos
8.1   Karl Kang wore a suit and red tie for the occasion and presided over the ceremony. It was thus that he admitted that he was the son of a Baptist preacher and had actually memorized the wedding vows as
346	KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
a child. But in deference to the revolution, he spoke thus, albeit the words of a prophet:
8.2   Your friend is your needs answered. She is your field, which you sow with love and reap with thanksgiving. And she is your board and your fireside. For you come to her with your hunger, and you seek her for peace.
8.3 When your friend speaks his mind you fear not the "nay" in your own mind, nor do you withhold the "aye. "And when he is silent your heart ceases not to listen to his heart; for without words, in friendship, all thoughts, all desires, all expectations are born and shared, with joy that is unclaimed.
8.4 When you part from your friend, you grieve not; for that which you love most in her may be clearer in her absence, as the mountain to the climber is clearer from the plain.
8.5   And let there be no purpose in friendship save the deepening of the spirit. For love that seeks aught but the disclosure of its own mystery is not love but a net cast forth; and only the unprofitable is caught.
8.6  And let your best be for your friend. If he must know the ebb of your tide, let him know its fiood also. For what is your friend that you should seek him with hours to kill? Seek him always with hours to live. For it is his to fill your need, but not your emptiness.
8.7   And in the sweetness of friendship let there be laughter, and sharing of pleasures. For in the dew of little things the heart finds its morning and is refreshed.
WHEREAS, these lawless elements have to a considerable extent succeeded in impeding our duly constituted authorities from performing their functions and discharging their duties and responsibilities in accordance with our laws and our Constitution to the great damage, prejudice and detriment of the people and the nation ...
I HOTEL
347
IX
The Philippines is in a strategic position. It is both East and West, right and left, rich and poor. We are neither here nor there.
—Imelda Marcos
9.1   Olivia said:
I do not offer the old smooth prizes,
but offer rough new prizes.
These are the days that must happen to us.
We shall not heap up what is called riches;
we shall scatter with lavish hand all that we earn or achieve.
However sweet the laid-up stores,
however convenient the dwellings,
we shall not remain there.
However sheltered the port,
and however calm the waters,
we shall not anchor there.
However welcome the hospitality that welcomes us,
we are permitted to receive it but a little while.
Afoot and lighthearted, take to the open road,
healthy, free, the world before us,
the long brown path before us,
leading wherever we choose.
Comrade, I give you my hand!
I give you my love, more precious than money.
I give you myself before preaching or law.
Will you give me yourself?
Will you come travel with me?
Shall we stick by each other as long as we live?
WHEREAS, it is evident that there is throughout the land a state of anarchy and lawlessness, chaos and disorder, turmoil and destruction of a magnitude equivalent to an actual war between the forces of our duly constituted government and the New People's Army ... whose political, social, economic
348
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
and moral precepts are based on the Marxist-Leninist-Maoist teachings and beliefs ...
The Philippines is where Asia wears a smile. Beautiful products can only be made by happy people.
—Imelda Marcos
10.1 Ben said:
If I speak of hunger, is that not a love poem?
If I speak of shelter
is that not a love poem?
If I speak of the labor of my parents and your parents and their people before them, is that not a love poem ?
If I speak of enslavement
of genocide
of blood spilled
on the road to freedom,
is that not a love poem ?
If I speak of your fearless voice
and the talent of your hands never at rest,
is that not a love poem?
May I be forever fed and sheltered in the freedom of your labor and the song of your voice.
WHEREAS, the Supreme Court in its said decision concluded that the unlawful activities of the aforesaid lawless elements actually pose a clear, present and grave danger to public safety and the security of the nation ...
I HOTEL
349
And my scientists tell me that these forces are so powerful that we can use them to protect you, our American friends, against Soviet missiles. —Imelda Marcos
n.i Jack, Aiko, and Stony sang a revolutionary wedding song especially composed to honor the nuptials.
11.2 Refrain:
Warrior woman and warrior man Battle axe and silver sword in hand Side-by-side you race into the fray In righteous revolution, proclaim a new day.
WHEREAS, in the unwavering prosecution of their revolutionary war against the Filipino people and their duly constituted government, the aforesaid lawless elements have . . . succeeded in bringing and introducing into the country... a substantial quantity of war material... and other combat paraphernalia ...
Why should people be afraid that we use a few small pellets of uranium at the nuclear power plant in Bataan? Don't they know that we re surrounded by uranium? We have the world's fourth largest deposits of uranium. Yes, we're all radioactive— must be the reason why we have so many faith healers! —Imelda Marcos
12.1 Karl Kang asked the people—that is to say, everyone in attendance—to repeat after him:
12.2 By the power invested in the people, we pronounce you, Bienvenido San Pablo and Olivia Wang, partners in life. All power to the people!
WHEREAS, in the execution of their overall revolutionary plan, the aforesaid lawless elements have prepared and released to
350
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
their various field commanders and Party workers a document captioned "REGIONAL PROGRAM OF ACTION 1972" ...
XIII
Bakit mayroong mga Pilipino na naninira kay Presidente at kay First Lady? Hindi ba nila alam na kami ang Tatay at Nanay ng Bayang Pilipino? Kung kamote ang Tatay at kung kamote ang Nanay, kamote ang Pilipino! Ang kamote ay hindi nag-aanak ng kamatis.
—Imelda Marcos
13.1 Upon pronouncement of the good news, Tino's barbershop quartet of guitars and ukuleles, plus a drum set, broke into a stepped-up Filipino rendition of the wedding recessional.
WHEREAS, in line with their "REGIONAL PROGRAM OF ACTION 1972," the aforesaid lawless elements have of late been conducting intensified acts of violence and terrorisms ...
XIV
My economic theory is that money was made round to go round. Money was made to encircle man so that he would blossom with many flowers. The whole trouble is, the center is money. All the heads of people thinking about money. All the hands of people reaching out for money. All their poor little bodies working for money. They are running in all directions for money.	—Imelda Marcos
14.1 Ben and Olivia stood to greet their well-wishers in the traditional receiving line.
14.2 A man unknown to Ben came forward with congratulations, and Ben queried: Are you a friend of Olivias, or perhaps a friend of one of the manongs'?
14.3 The man replied honestly: Hey man, I heard there was food, so I came on in.
I HOTEL
351
WHEREAS, in line with the same "REGIONAL PROGRAM OF ACTION 1972," the aforesaid lawless elements have also fielded in the Greater Manila area several of their "Sparrow Units" or "Simbad Units" to undertake liquidation missions against ranking government officials, military personnel and prominent citizens ...
xv
I always go with the flow. That is why I don't tire easily. Have you noticed how when you're traveling from the West to the Philippines, you don't get tired, but when you travel from here to the West, you're exhausted? This is because in one instance you're going with the current of the Gulf Stream; in the other instance, you're going against it.
—Imelda Marcos
15.1 As if by some miracle, the tables were suddenly filled with every kind of food imaginable: luscious roast duck, plump tofu with cashews, garlicky pancit and adobo, steamed rock cod in ginger and scallions, crab in black beans, stir-fried vegetables of every sort, an entire roast pig that the manongs had managed to bury in a pit in the alleyway, and mounds and mounds of steamed rice.
15.2 The old men of the I-Hotel were an assortment of cooks and short-order chefs from Chinatown restaurants and the galleys of the merchant marine.
15.3  Do not be fooled by the poor old man who hides a cleaver in his sleeve.
WHEREAS, in addition to the above-described social disorder, there is also the equally serious disorder in Mindanao and Sulu ...
XVI
I get my fingers in all our pies. Before you know it, your little fingers including all your toes are in all the pies. Imelda Marcos
352
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
16.1 Macario stood before enormous sugar-egg-and-flour twin peaks, a baking feat orchestrated by himself with the help of several tenants to create what Macario called Mao's mountains: Taihang and Wangwu. The frosting on the twin cakes was a celebratory red and gold, while the inside was rich, dark chocolate. Macario explained Mao's story of the foolish old man who wished to remove the mountains obstructing the view before his house by digging the soil away, that the foolish old man explained to the wise old man that eventually the mountains would be dug away, if not by himself, then by his sons and their sons and their sons' sons. Thus, Mao explained the foolish work of a billion Chinese people intent on removing the twin mountains of feudalism and imperialism.
16.2 The guests eagerly carved away at the chocolate mountains, although many interpreted the twin mountains to represent the wedding couple: Olivia in red and Ben in gold.
16.3 Mountain fables may move from mountain to mountain.
WHEREAS, the Mindanao Independence Movement with the active material and financial assistance of foreign political and economic interests, is engaged in an open and unconcealed attempt to establish by violence and force a separate and independent political state ...
XVII
If Imelda can make it, everybody else can make it. —Imelda Marcos
17.1 Macario proposed a toast and recited thus: May the road rise to meet you. May the wind be always at your back. May the sun shine warm upon your face, The rains fall soft upon your fields. And until we meet again, May the people hold you in the palms of our hands.
I HOTEL
353
May the people be with you and bless you.
May you see your children's children.
May you be poor in misfortune
Rich in blessings.
May you know nothing but happiness
From this day forward.
May the road rise to meet you.
May the wind be always at your back.
May the warm rays of sun fall upon your home,
And may the hand of a friend always be near.
May green be the grass you walk on.
May blue be the skies above you.
May pure be the joys that surround you.
May true be the hearts that love you.
WHEREAS, because of the aforesaid disorder resulting from armed clashes, killings, massacres, arsons, rapes, pillages, destruction of whole villages and towns and the inevitable cessation of agricultural and industrial operations ... a great many parts of the islands of Mindanao and Sulu are virtually now in a state of actual war ...
XVIII
To know Asia is to feel Asia. Asia must be felt with the heart in order to be understood.
—Imelda Marcos
18.1 Ben serenaded Olivia with Beatles songs on the piano, surprising everyone with popular tunes like "Yesterday" and "When I'm Sixty-four."
WHEREAS, the violent disorder in Mindanao and Sulu has to date resulted in the killing of over 1,000 civilians and about 2,000 armed Muslims and Christians ...
354
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
XIX
Every Christmas, I ask myself what else I may give the young, and my answer always comes down to love and more love. —Imelda Marcos
19.1 Olivia pushed Ben to one side of the piano bench and played several stanzas from a Chopin mazurka, her fingers flashing across the keys.
19.2 Show-off, he snarled, pushing her away to play "You've Got a Friend," cackling at her horrified reaction.
WHEREAS, because of the foregoing acts of armed insurrection ... and because of the spreading lawlessness and anarchy throughout the land ... and finally because public order and safety and the security of this nation demand that immediate, swift, decisive and effective action be taken ...
xx
People say I'm extravagant because I want to be surrounded by beauty. But tell me, who wants to be surrounded by garbage? Beauty is love made real and the spirit of love is God. Only a crazy man wants to be surrounded by garbage, and I'm not crazy just yet.	—Imelda Marcos
20.1 Tino's band joined in, then changed the tune to dance music, at which point all the guests crowded onto the floor.
WHEREAS, in cases of invasion, insurrection or rebellion or imminent danger thereof, I, as President of the Philippines, have, under the Constitution, three courses of action open to me, namely: (a) call out the armed forces to suppress the present lawless violence; (b) suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus to make the arrest and apprehension of these lawless elements easier and more effective; or (c) place the Philippines or any part thereof under martial law ...
I HOTEL
355
I
XXI
I have only ever dreamt of a small house with a picket fence by the sea. But how can I stop what I am doing? It becomes a romance not only to a president and a husband but a romance of principles and commitment. A romance for humanity. This is perhaps what makes me so controversial. I am beyond logic and rationality.
—Imelda Marcos
21.1At some appropriate moment, the band serenaded the wedding couple, following them out the entrance of the I-Hotel in a spray of rice and a flurry of rose petals.
WHEREAS, I have already utilized the first two courses of action ... but in spite of all that, both courses of action were found inadequate and ineffective to contain, much less solve, the present rebellion and lawlessness in the country ...
XXII
I have a different way of thinking. I think synergistically. I'm not linear in thinking. I'm not very logical.
—Imelda Marcos
22.1 On Kearny, the gold Mercedes Benz awaited them, decked out like a float with flowers, balloons, crepe paper, and revolutionary slogans. Venceremos! All power to the people! Unity through Struggle! Makibaka! Long Live the Revolution! Viva la huelga! Si sepuede! Save the I-Hotel!
WHEREAS, the rebellion and armed action undertaken by these lawless elements of the communist and other armed aggrupa-tions ... have assumed the magnitude of an actual state of war against our people and the Republic of the Philippines ...
XXIII
The only gold my husband has is in his heart.
—Imelda Marcos
23.1 They drove to the Golden Gate and watched the sun set over the bay.
NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested upon me ... do hereby place the entire Philippines ... under martial law and, in my capacity as their commander-in-chief, do hereby command the armed forces of the Philippines, to maintain law and order throughout the Philippines, prevent or suppress all forms of lawless violence as well as any act of insurrection or rebellion and to enforce obedience to all the laws and decrees, orders and regulations promulgated by me personally or upon my direction.
XXIV
Win or lose, we go shopping after the election. —Imelda Marcos
24.1 Olie said: I married you for my green card, you know.
24.2 Benny said: / married you for the Benz.
In addition, I do hereby order that all persons presently detained, as well as all others who may hereafter be similarly detained for the crimes of insurrection or rebellion ... for crimes against national security ... and for such other crimes as will be enumerated in Orders that I shall subsequently promulgate . . . shall be kept under detention until otherwise ordered released by me or by my duly designated representative.
-Imelda Marcos
25.1 Sneaking back to Kearny Street, Ben swept Olivia up and carried her ceremoniously across the threshold of the I-Hotel. He smiled when she did not protest.
356
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
357
25.2 Tucked into their single room, Olivia handed Ben a gift, a wrapped shoebox. I've been saving this for you. She smiled. Guess what it is.
25.3 Too light for a gun, he quipped.
25.4 Ripping it open, he pulled from the tissue paper the right side of a worn shoe, its rubber sole, red canvas, and laces caked in the white paint of the I-Hotel.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed. Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy two.
FERDINAND E. MARCOS
President
Republic of the Philippines
358
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
7: National Liberation
... the concept of competition belongs to a world of hunger, because competition belongs to an underdeveloped world, because competition belongs to a world where hunger and poverty have become institutions . . . you have been forging your own revolutionary consciousness ... you have been helping to create the material base that along with education and consciousness will allow us to live according to truly communist norms, that is, according to truly fraternal norms, truly human norms, in which each man and woman will see others as his brothers and sisters ... we have seen what can be done through human collectivity; we have seen what you have been able to accomplish in three months, a small army of young people working here enthusiastically, because you did not see work as a punishment, but rather as an ennobling activity, one that inspires man, that can fill him with happiness. That is work when it is not slave work; that is work when man is not exploited.... The plants that you have sown here will remain on the earth; your example will remain with our youth; and the heartening response of the new revolutionary generation will remain with our revolution.
—Fidel Castro, April 29,1967
Let us speak of the sugar cane itself, rising in great clustering mastheads from the rich red earth, jointed like bamboo, stalks progressing from murky reds and purplish yellows to the green-grass spray at their waving peaks.
And to the people who cut the cane, who walked into its green moisture at dawn to level the fields with their swiping machetes, the instructions were simple:
I HOTEL
359