8: Death of a Revolutionary
. . . The Great Society is not a safe harbor, a resting place, a final objective, a finished work. It is a challenge constantly renewed, beckoning us toward a destiny where the meaning of our lives matches the marvelous products of our labor. —Lyndon Baines Johnson
1.1    Ben looked over from his typewriter at Olivia in bed, who was listening absently to Malcolm, now a three-year-old, yelling and running up and down the corridor outside with a playmate. He saw the pain beneath her forced serenity and thought to distract her. Why am I writing this? He threw his arms up in frustration.
1.2    Because it's what you're good at figuring out what the others are thinking and interpreting what we're thinking and eventually creating the right thinking so we can merge into one new party. It's like drawing up a constitution.
1.3    You sound so sure. All anybody does is argue back, criticize every fucking comma. Where's the merging?
1.4	On paper, no one's a match for you. Admit it: you love kicking ass.
1.5	Strategy before tactics is not kicking ass.
1.6	If you don't think, we can't organize. You leave the tactics to me.
1.7   He looked at her—her diminishing figure, the dark hollows of her high cheeks, then looked away.
i. 8 Hey, she jabbed at him, it's a good thing for you I saw that aurora bore-alis. Without me, you'd be nothing.
366
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
1.9   Bitch.
1.10 If you can't tough this out, you know where you can go.
1.11  Not much time left to change the world.
1.12  You have a deadline. Get back to work.
II Justice is incidental to law and order.
—J. Edgar Hoover
2.1    How did we ever get to be leaders of anything? We never went to war or killed anybody. Never kidnapped anyone to save anyone.
2.2	Some guerilla force we've been, hiding out in the I-Hotel.
2.3	We stopped being clandestine long ago, but we're still illusive.
2.4	Think we've been infiltrated?
2.5	Why not?
2.6	I thought Y was a spy. I got her purged.
2.7	She was struggled out.
2.8   She was screwed up. She was sleeping around with all the men. After we purged her, she overdosed. Someone said she didn't have any family but us.
2.9   It's not your fault. There were bigger issues.
2.10 Maybe we could have handled it differently. Did you sleep with her?
2.11  She was a liability.
2.12 She broke the rules, but she wasn't the only one. Only she got purged. Was that fair?
2.13 Look who's talking about fair? At the time, you'd have said it was just.
2.14 We were right at the time.
2.15 Judgments can't be made in the absence of history or culture. That's about as just or as unjust as it gets.
I HOTEL
367
2.16 We made our judgment out of fear. I dont have that kind of fear any-
2.17 Be honest. Youve never known fear. You're the commandante.
2.18 Fuck off.
2.19 Olie, you're so full of shit.
2.20 've been thinking, and it's not that I'm not going to be here to see it. I wouldn't tell anybody but you, but I dont think we're ever going to win this thing. It's all about the struggle. But we can never win.
A man is not finished when he is defeated. He is finished when he quits.	—Richard M. Nixon
3.1   I really believed that we could change things, that if you thought it, I could make it happen. I believed in your mind. I was the van. You the guard. Was I wrong?
3.2    What if the shape of my mind took extreme turns, would you have followed anyway?
3.3	I'm not stupid.
3.4	That's what they all say. Besides, it isn't my thinking.
3.5	That s what they all say.
3.6	Change will happen because its possibilities are embedded in history.
3.7   Do you still believe history is inevitable? Why am I dying? Because cancer was embedded in my body?
3.8   I don't know.
3.9 They'll change everything, you know. When it s all said and done, they can change the history. We'll be like the Gang of Four. They'll only remember that we purged people, that Y died, that I was a fucking bitch.
368
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
3.10	Worried about your legacy, aye Olie?
3.11	Fuck yes. You'd better make me a martyr.
3.12	Tve already written your eulogy.
3.13	Benny, did I just imagine all this ?
3.14 He lifted her emaciated body from the bed and carried her over to see Malcolm, sleeping in a puddle of toys and blankets. No, he said.
3.15 He has your eyes, Benny. That's why I married you, for those eyes.
3.16 He brought her back to the bed.
3.17 That stuff you use. I know all about it. For Malcolm, you've got to stop. I'm going to help you stop. And she directed him as if she knew all about it, which perhaps she did, directing the needle, then holding the syringe's plunger with her free hand.
3.18 This better work. No, look this way. I want to see your eyes one last time. She whispered so that he only thought he heard: Great resolution and irony.
3.19 He wrapped his face in the great cascades of her hair and wept.
I HOTEL
369