4: In Practice
... as Asian people, if we seek to explain the problems of ourselves, our community and all poor and oppressed peoples in the United States, we come to the conclusion that revolution is the only answer.	—Pat Sumi
Who, then, is the revolutionary woman? In these days she is a barefoot peasant, a child on her back, wielding an AK-47. Of course, she may be uniformed in cotton pajama trousers, batik sarong, sari, Mao jacket, jilbab, miniskirt, or Levi jeans; covered in straw hat, veil, hijab, worker's cap, or helmet. In every case, the winds of liberation blow through her fingers.
But to continue: Olivia Wang had ventured from her rarified and privileged existence, her private schooling, onto a bus traveling into Mississippi, and returned with a Negro boyfriend. These events were not in the auspicious plans of the Wang clan, who in fact had betrothed their youngest daughter into a mercantile dynasty whose assets might fund an entire army. One day, Olivia borrowed the key to her father's car, a gold Mercedes Benz, the starred icon on its hood pressing its silver nose through the Manhattan traffic, and drove away forever.
1.3    Patriarchy, as with other forms of oppression, may hold the key to its own demise.
330
II
The black woman lives in a society that discriminates against her on two counts . . . the twin jeopardy of race and sex . . . To date, neither the black movement nor women's liberation succinctly addresses itself to the dilemma confronting the black who is female. And as a consequence ... black women themselves are now becoming socially and politically active.
—Shirley Chisholm
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
2.1    So it was that Third World revolutionary women converged on the city of Vancouver for the Indochinese Women's Conference. It was there that a third of the women proposed a third jeopardy to the twin of racism and sexism: imperialism.
2.2   Friedrich Engels argued that in the context of the family, a woman's relationship to her husband is as the proletariat to the bourgeoisie. Or as Mao Tse-tung said, a woman is obedient first to her father, then to her husband, and finally to her son. Triple jeopardies abound. How, under such conditions, may half of the people rise from their oppression?
2.3   Third World revolutionary women rose to the occasion with such speechmaking: Black people and Vietnamese people have exposed the weakness of white Western dominance, revealing that the weak and oppressed can struggle against a powerful enemy. Our feminist liberation movement must be viewed within this context of an international social revolution and the struggle by women for our human rights.
2.4   And further: In the fight for national liberation in Asia, Africa, and Latin America, women have not waited, first, "to give their men their manhood," and second, to wage the war; they have first and foremost taken arms and gone to war.
III
.    Revolution is a serious thing, the most serious thing about a revolutionary's life. When one commits oneself to the struggle, it must be for a lifetime. —Angela Davis
3.1    Revolutionary Woman #I—Code Name: Angela
3.2   Angela Woo was one of those very competitive, highly competent, achievement-oriented young women, valedictorian of her graduating class who went on to get her MBA and consequently placement in a large multinational corporation. Year after year, she worked diligently as a team member in middle management, observing gradually younger and younger white men bumped up to higher positions.
I HOTEL
331
Finally, perhaps as a crude test, she was called in to help negotiate union contractual terms for factory workers in one of several corporate subsidiaries. When negotiations came to a halt, the workers voted to strike for an increase in pay and benefits that by Angela's forecasts were probably reasonable. But being a team member, she remained silent, until she walked onto the factory floor and discovered that many of the strikebreakers were poor Chinese immigrant women much like her own mother.
3.3   To live in the colonized world is to know an international caste system; at the top, the white male ruling class, and at the bottom, your colored mother.
IV
"The Price of My Soul" refers not to the price for which I would be prepared to sell out, but rather to the price we all must pay in life to preserve our own integrity. To gain that which is worth having, it may be necessary to lose everything else.
—Bernadette Devlin
4.1   Revolutionary Woman #2—Code Name: Bernadette
4.2   Bernadette Kim ran away from an abusive husband who flung her from the kitchen wall, crashing her against the Frigidaire, hurtling her headfirst into the grill of the hot stove, shattering a warm casserole, breaking her arm, and exacting on her a purple bruise that swept across the soft features of her young face. Hidden away from the man who had become a policeman over her life, she found work to support herself and the baby growing within her. But as she came into the sixth month of pregnancy, she was promptly given notice with the justification: We thought you were just gaining a little weight.
4.3   For the woman, the consequences of gaining a little weight are multiple.
332
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
Among poor people, there's not any question about women being strong—even stronger than men—they work in the fields right along with the men. When your survival is at stake, you don't have these questions about yourself like middle-class women do. —Dolores Huerta
5.1    Revolutionary Woman #3—Code Name: Dolores
Dolores Tadiar lived the suburban middle-class housewife life in a three-bedroom house with her three children, a dog, a petunia garden, and a salaried husband—the very paradigm of the perfect American family. One day, the salaried husband lost his job, became an alcoholic, and disappeared with another woman. Unable to make the mortgage payments, Dolores lost the house, squished her three kids into a cheap one-room apartment, carted the smallest from babysitter to babysitter, and got a job as a waitress. At the end of the month, she partitioned her meager wage and tips into rent, food, and child care.
5.3   The emulation of the American Dream is a great hoax.
VI
Can I shake your hand?
What for?
I want to congratulate you.
For what?
For what you are doing for your people.
What's that?
For giving them direction.
—Yuri Kochiyama (conversation with Malcolm X)
6.1   Revolutionary Woman #4—Code Name: Yuri
6.2   Kicked out of the house by a traditionally rigid and God-fearing father for losing her virginity to her then-boyfriend and becoming
I HOTEL
333
pregnant out of holy wedlock, Susan Sakai cast about for another family, another tradition, another identity. Joining a so-called radical collective, she discovered in time that the collective had no expectations for the care of her child, and that if she refused to bed down with any of the collective men, she was not fulfilling her familial duties to their collective welfare, to the greater good of the Asian American nation. Babyy they purred, you are beautiful, but you got to stay back to push your man forward. At which point, she left with her child, her lesbian lover, and a new name: Yuri.
6.3   It may indeed be impossible to escape traditions embedded over many centuries and many civilizations, falling into the mistake of reenactment of one entrenched belief or another. The immediate answer is rebellion.
VII
Better Red than Dead
—La Nada Means, on Alcatraz
7.1    Revolutionary Woman #5—Code Name: La Nada
7.2   La Nada Hayes, a mixed child—black, Chicano, and Asian—found herself unaccepted by any community—black, brown, or yellow. Her dark olive skin tone, her braided auburn hair, her Oriental eyes, all conspired to confuse. Thus rejected, she became an Oreo, a coconut, a banana, and joined a white women's lib group to demand a woman's right to education and equal job opportunities, pretending that she too suffered the boredom of the suburban bedroom, until one day she found herself employed and managed by one of the group's women, who spoke in a mincing and patronizing voice about how dating a white male colleague in the same company —who was in any case the enemy—was calling attention to herself as a black woman and creating an un-sisterly feeling among other women and that this situation might—and this was completely confidential but revealed in consideration of their long association as feminists—just might cost her her job.
334
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
7.3   Male chauvinism can be perceived as a form of racism based on a false belief in the biological inferiority of women. However, the oppression of the colored woman and the oppression of the white American housewife are not to be confused.
VIII
So I tell people I don't want no equal rights anymore. I'm fighting for human rights. I don't want to become equal to men like them that beat us. I don't want to become the kind of person that would kill you because of your color.
—Fannie Lou Hamer
8.1    Revolutionary Woman #6—Code Name: Fannie
8.2   Fannie Chow came from a long and respectable line of Chinese matriarchs. This history was not a consequence of the transgression of Confucian laws of the proper hierarchy by men over women, but a consequence of abandonment, abandonment by men who traveled off in search of the Gold Mountain, first sending home pieces of the mythic mountain and finally sending nothing. This pattern of abandonment was repeated generation after generation, each husband lost to the brutality and submission of the coolies' labor—laying tracks, mining borax, laundering shirts. This one blown to bits by dynamite. That one starved by vermin. This one convulsed by tuberculosis. That one lynched from his own queue. Fannie's father was knifed in a gambling dispute. Who was to blame for these lost men?
8.3   Do you really believe in the bitter myth of the imperious matriarch who keeps her man's testicles in a silver box under her silken pillow, removing the box from time to time to hear their soft tingle and toss?
IX
Woman is the nigger of the world.
—Yoko Ono
9.1   Revolutionary Woman #7—Code Name: Yoko
I HOTEL
335
9.2   Yoko Smith married her high-school boyfriend, Jack, right out of high school and just before he was drafted and shipped out, Private Jack Smith, to defend American freedom in Vietnam. In a period of less than three months, she changed from Miss Yoko Sakamoto to Mrs. Jack Smith to Mrs. Yoko Smith, widow. A photograph in the high-school yearbook shows Yoko as homecoming queen in gold crown and pink gown, a reclining odalisque held aloft by the entire football team. After Jack's final salute into the patriotic heavens, each of his team buddies came around to console his grieving widow and to get some piece of the action that Jack had once kept for himself all senior year. By the time Yoko woke from her grief, she had tried to commit suicide, self-inflict an abortion that resulted in a miscarriage with permanent damage to her uterus, and was working through a drug rehabilitation program. Propped up on white sheets in a sterile hospital room, she flipped through Life magazine and stared in horror, humiliation, and self-recognition at the running figure of a naked weeping girl stripped by napalm.
9.3   If beauty is in the eye of the beholder, so too the ugly, but what of terror and atrocity?
x
There are well over 600 million workers, peasants and soldiers in our country, whereas there are only a handful of landlords, rich peasants, counter-revolutionaries, bad elements, rightists, and bourgeois elements. Shall we serve this handful, or the 600 million?	—Chiang Ching
10.1 Revolutionary sisters, like interchanging stars, floated into a small but growing constellation, tugged into variable patterns of revolutionary commitment: health care, child care, bilingual education, shelters, drug rehabilitation, counseling, co-ops, labor unions, political organization, party formation. Olivia was at the head of the phone tree. The meetings were nightly. The work was urgent.
10.2 Revolutionaries are not determined by sex.
336	KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
5: On Colonialism
Then they put a treacherous big viper on your chest: On your neck they laid the yoke of fire-water, They took your sweet wife for glitter and cheap pearls, Your incredible riches that nobody could measure.
—Patrice Lumumba, Dawn in the Heart of Africa
1.1    Ben San Pablo was named after his father, Bienvenido San Pablo, Sr., a strong muscular man of broad shoulders and deep voice, a tough, bold exterior fortified nightly by the golden flame lit within an amber bottle of whiskey. There was no earthly weight that Bienvenido Senior could not lift, no woman he could not charm, no comrade from whom he did not receive respect. And yet a great weight surrounded his heart like a lead suitcase, an unattainable woman sneered blue cat eyes in his dreams, a great white father reminded him constantly of his place. Thus a great man was a cripple in his own mind, uncontrollably jealous of the women with whom he became attached such that his paranoia and self-doubt eventually drove each of them away, and though a respected foreman at his job, he spent all his additional pay buying drinks and loaning money to his working crew to assure himself of their friendship and continued loyalty.
1.2   A man's self-worth can only be measured by himself.
Raving mad I greet you with my ravings whiter than death. —Aime Cesaire, Raving Mad
2.1   Ben San Pablo, Jr., spent his teenage years running with a white crowd. After all, was not his mother, the second wife of Bienvenido
I HOTEL
337