. What Is to 5e Done?
The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggle.	—Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels,
Communist Manifesto
Study Group #I: What is class struggle?
Indeed. Are you rich, or are you poor? Do you command great armies and oversee great territories, or are you the fodder of stinking bodies sacrificed at the front? Do you rule by the will of God or the Mandate of Heaven, or do you grovel in the dirt for your subsistence and share your food with animals? Do you stand at the pinnacle of power, however precariously protecting, with the great umbrella of your powerful arms and silken sleeves, a hierarchy of hapless fools and ungrateful subjects, or are you a struggling peon of unfortunate birth? Ah, but I have but described the peaking ascendance of only one period in the struggle of human history. Now you shall hear of the next and the next. The rise and fall of civilizations held in dusty monuments for thousands of years may suddenly be compressed in no doubt brilliant minds to explain the present moment.
1.3    Karl Kang, such a mind of brilliance, a graduate student of political economy who spoke and read in Korean, Chinese, Japanese, French, a bit of Russian, and of course English, was a mentor whose teaching was indispensable to youth desirous of answers.
1.4   They met in Kang's apartment on Dwight, blocks from the university, arriving with their copies of Capital, The State and Revolution, What Is to Be Done?
1.5    Kang opened the discussion. We're going to take this slowly and build our knowledge. What I realize is that this is a body of knowledge that has been censored out of your education, whereas to think in Marxist terms
outside of America is common practice. Marxism is a way of thinking.
1.6   Ben spoke enthusiastically: For the first time I feel as if I am reading about my own condition, about the condition of my parents as workers, and I finally understand my father's alienation. Although he did not admit it here, it was the case that as Ben read, he came to passages in Marx where he could not help but to kiss the pages and to whoop and dance about his room.
1.7   Olivia rolled her eyes at what she interpreted to be an excessive emotional display and asked for clarification about the differences and similarities between the peasant and the industrial worker.
Without a revolutionary theory there can be no revolutionary movement.	—V. I. Lenin, What Is to Be Done?
II
The discovery of America, the rounding of the Cape, opened up fresh ground for the bourgeoisie. The East-Indian and Chinese markets, the colonization of America, trade with the colonies, the increase in the means of exchange and in the commodities generally, gave to commerce, to navigation, to industry, an impulse never before known....
—Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Communist Manifesto
2.1   The gold Mercedes Benz drove their hostility in silence across the border of California, only Macario waking from time to time to comment on the passing scenery, the discovered America flying past their windows, the West slowly passing into the East.
2.2   Olivia turned from her driving occasionally to observe Ben's sleeping body sprawled generously across the backseat. Somewhere in the Nevada desert, he reached over and rolled down the window, allowing a gust of cold dust to rush into the leather interior. Excuse me, she said, would you roll that window back up? I can put on the air conditioning for you, if you wish.
2.3    Wow, he exclaimed with forced excitement. This is the first time I've been in an air-conditioned car! But he held out for a long moment
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
315
before he rolled up the window, watching the black threads of her hair swish around the car, flying up and around and forward, her angry gestures pulling the strands away from her vision.
2.4   So, asked Ben, slowly squeezing the Nevada air out of their private conveyance, how much does a car like this cost?
2.5   I wouldn't know. Would you like to sell it and find out?
2.6   Hey, said Macario, can we get to Montreal first?
. . . the role of the vanguard fighter can be fulfilled only by a party that is guided by the most advanced theory.
—V. I. Lenin, What Is to Be Done?
in
Modern industry has established the world market, for which the discovery of America paved the way.
—Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels,
Communist Manifesto
3.1    Study Group #2: Who is the vanguard?
3.2   How shall the people be organized, those huddled masses, that wretched refuse? Who will teach them how to breathe free? Who will show them the way to the lamp beside the golden door?
3.3 Olivia spoke first: I find this reading more useful because Lenin outlines an organizational path. You read what is working as it is in progress. He shows how a vanguard can be in place while supporting a national war, then move in to influence and control the new state.
3.4   Ben said, I feel skeptical because he's saying that the vanguard is a small, conspiratorial, professional, and intellectual elite. It seems contradictory. To create an equal state, doesn't the system itself need to be equal?
3.5    Olivia sneered, Utopian bullshit.
316	KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
3.6   Karl Kang corrected the possibly volatile but useless direction of their discussion by intervening: If you read further, you should understand the context in which this is stated, that of a hostile and oppressive system that at any moment may imprison and kill Lenin and his comrades. You should be reminded that this is a war, and the formation of a vanguard is a strategy necessary to waging war.
... it is not enough to call ourselves the "vanguard," the advanced detachment; we must act like one; we must act in such a way that all other detachments shall see us, and be obliged to admit, that we are marching in the vanguard.
—V. I. Lenin, What Is to Be Done?
IV
The need of a constantly expanding market for its products chases the bourgeoisie over the whole surface of the globe. It must nestle everywhere, settle everywhere, establish connexions everywhere.	—Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels,
Communist Manifesto
4.1   Chicago, the great city of the American Midwest, was their midpoint destination. Standing on the shores of the great Lake Michigan, a wall of skyscrapers looming behind, and autumn winds whipping up a red and brown flurry of deciduous leaves, Ben said, / think it's time to sell the Benz. Who's got the cash to stay in this town?
4.2   Macario suggested, Maybe we could check into a hospital and hang out with the Pilipino nurses.
4.3   But Olivia sauntered from the telephone box at the corner and announced, I've found us a place. They II caravan with us to New York, then Montreal. Her old connections with the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee proved useful. She slapped a map into Ben's hands. It's on Monroe Street off the Eisenhower Expressway. Think you can handle that?
I HOTEL
317
4.4   A year later, a Cook County tactical unit would charge into the same Monroe apartment and gun down two young Black Panthers, Mark Clark and Fred Hampton, wounding others, arresting all. An investigation would show that the police had fired a hundred shots to a miserly one shot from a single Panther rifle. Olivia then remembered the living room sofa where she had slept, watching over Ben on the floor, bundled in unconscious torpor in the clumsy cocoon of his blue sleeping bag.
. . . our task is to utilize every manifestation of discontent, and to collect and make the best of every grain of even rudimentary protest.	—V. I. Lenin, What Is to Be Done?
The bourgeoisie, by the rapid improvement of all instruments of production, by the immensely facilitated means of communication, draws all, even the most barbarian, nations into civilization. The cheap prices of its commodities are the heavy artillery with which it batters down all Chinese walls ...
—Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Communist Manifesto
5.1    Study Group #3: On Colonialism
5.2   Let us speak then of opium, arriving by the chestloads via the Ganges River basin, transported on the ships of the great British Empire's East India Company, then blown into the Chinese atmosphere, lacing every pipe, befuddling every citizen, every worker, every class, creeping into every household, nestling everywhere, battering down our Chinese walls, a gunpowder without a sound. What is this invasive market but a necessary stage on the road from the barbarian to the civilized, from celestial despotism to useful history?
5.3    Olivia said, Lenin makes a declaration of an international vision against colonialism, but Marx's ideas, especially about China, show his ignorance of China.
5.4   Isn't his example really India?Ben chided, Aren't you just pissed because he refers to the Chinese as barbarians?
318
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
5.5    We were never barbarians.
5.6   Again Karl Kang made corrections. You need to think of these writings as building blocks—Lenin building on Marx in terms of a Russian state, then Mao building on Marx in terms of the Chinese.
5.7   Yes, said Olivia, and next we think in terms of the U.S. imperial state. So on that note, what do you think about Lenin's insistence on the Iskra, the national paper, as a mobilizing entity? Think about it, every group out there has their rag, but it's about communications, right? We need to get ahold of other means of communication, like radio and TV.
5.8   Ben quipped, There you go again. Can we stick to the reading for a change?
5.9   Karl sighed.
Only a party that will organize really nation-wide exposures can become the vanguard of the revolutionary forces in our time.	—V. I. Lenin, What Is to Be Done?
VI
[The bourgeoisie] compels all nations, on pain of extinction, to adopt the bourgeois mode of production; it compels them to introduce what it calls civilization in their midst, i.e., to become bourgeois themselves. In a word, it creates a world after its own image.	—Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels,
Communist Manifesto
6.1   Traveling from the island city of New York to the island city of Montreal, Ben lost the spacious backseat to two more travelers. As circumstances would have it, the driving rotated along with the seating arrangement such that Ben finally finagled a way to sit alongside Olivia, who fought for hours the sleepy urge to nod off, then succumbing, awoke with the sudden disgust of finding her head propped against Ben's willing shoulder.
I HOTEL
6.2   Oh. She pulled herself up.
6.3   Ben turned his head and observed the shoulder of his sweatshirt. Is
that your drool?
6.4  At the Canadian border, where they presented their identifications, Olivia spoke pleasantly with the authorities in French.
6.5   One of the Panther travelers said, Olivia, teach me some of those French fries so I can be cool too.
6.6 Ben retorted, Cool or stuck up?
... to concentrate all secret functions in the hands of as small a number of professional revolutionaries as possible does not mean that the latter will "do the thinking for all" and that the crowd will not take an active part in the movement.
—V. I. Lenin, What Is to Be Done?
VII
Just as it has made the country dependent on the towns, so it has made barbarian and semi-barbarian countries dependent on the civilized ones, nations of peasants on nations of bourgeois, the East on the West.
—Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Communist Manifesto
7.1    Study Group #4: What is the national question?
7.2   We assume that the creation of a nation, the unification of one people of common origin, language, and traditions is a political given, a right that accompanies power, protection, and territorial sovereignty, but such a nation is subject to the whims of trade and exchange, both material and intellectual, that seep through and in time overtake the formalities of borders so carefully guarded by armies, navies, and stone fortresses. Great warlords have amassed great territories subjugating nations within nations and have discovered in time the unwieldiness of such ambitions. On the other
320
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
hand, great nations have dispersed their people to every corner of the earth and may thereby subjugate the nation from within.
7.3   Ben asked, When did we become Asian American?
7.4   Olivia answered, What sort of question is that?
7.5    Karl interrupted. Wait, it's not a stupid question. Ninteen sixty-six. There's a magazine article about the Japanese American model minority, a kind of American. Before that, Japanese are racially identified as Japanese—otherwise how could they all be interned during the war? After sixty-six, we all get racially identified as hyphenated Americans.
7.6   Olivia posed, But Asian American is apolitical designation.
7.7   Karl answered, It's political, racial, and national. Look, you are organizing around this designation, and that's useful, but you are going to have to scrutinize it through a Marxist analysis that includes class. Hey, trust me. This is going to make or break you.
7.8   Ben asked, You mean we have to move away from race and organize based on class?
7.9   Karl shook his head. Don't think it's that easy.
The centralization of the most secret functions in an organization of revolutionaries will not diminish, but rather increase the extent and quality of the activity of a large number of other organizations which are intended for a broad public and are therefore as loose and as non-secret as possible.
—V. I. Lenin, What Is to Be Done?
Of all the classes that stand face to face with the bourgeoisie today, the proletariat alone is a really revolutionary class.
—Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Communist Manifesto
I HOTEL
321
8.1   The gold Mercedes Benz arrived in Montreal in time for the opening ceremonies and remarks for the Hemispheric Conference to End the Vietnam War. Which hemisphere? you may ask. The world has been cut in half.
8.2   Twenty delegates, among them Olivia, Ben, Macario, and their Black Panther travelers, stormed to the podium in protest of the format and organizing principals of the conference and demanded that members of their radical caucus be included in the ongoing planning, assuming that significant changes in the format should be instituted, and that workshop discussion topics should be reformulated. To wit: change the conference theme from Peace in Vietnam to Stop U.S. imperialism!
8.3   A Panther spoke: We demand that funds be immediately raised to bring Black Panther Party Chairman Bobby Seale to address this conference. The oppression of the Vietnamese people is the same oppression of Third World people in Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the U.S. of America.
8.4   Ben San Pablo spoke: America is conducting a war of technological genocide in Vietnam. It's not enough to make a plea for peace. We've got to begin to organize a strategic front to actively dismantle the military industrial complex, that supports this genocide.
8.5   Olivia Wang spoke: We salute those representatives from the Democratic Republic of Vietnam and the National Liberation Front in their long struggle for self-determination and one Vietnam against the weaponry and might of u.s. imperialism!
8.6   Later it was reported that peaceniks, white liberals, and old Communists, hooted, Boo! Hiss!
8.7   The politics of peace may be anything but peaceful.
... in order to "serve" the mass of movement we must have people who will devote themselves exclusively to Social-Democratic activities, and that such people must train themselves patiently and steadfastly to be professional revolutionaries.	—V. I. Lenin, What Is to Be Done?
322
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
What the bourgeoisie therefore produces, above all, are its own grave-diggers. Its fall and the victory of the proletariat are equally inevitable. —Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels,
Communist Manifesto
9.1   Study Group #5: The Science of History
9.2   In ancient times, the whim of the gods and the stars told and foretold the unfolding of events. We have relied on prophets, clairvoyants, religious belief, philosophy, and ideology from one side or another of the globe to decipher, to instruct, and to remember the great panoply of our civilizations, but to what end? Only to discover that the exchange of one's labor in the form of a coin is at the center of the meaning of our lives.
9.3   Karl Kang introduced the reading for the week: The fundamental idea that you need to understand here is Marx's materialist interpretation of history, that human institutions and development are rooted in economic activities, not in any mysticism or ideas controlled by the ruling class. Economic change is the driving force of history.
9.4   Olivia said, I see it like the scientific method, that you analyze empirical data and actual phenomena. It's a technique to observe the real world and realpeople.
9.5   Ben asked, If you follow that idea, then Marxist ideas would be like hypotheses.
9.6 Karl Kang said, Marx worked out a theory of history that should embody social experiments or, as you say, proposed hypotheses.
9.7   Olivia said, In other words, we should be able to create an experiment to test the theory with predictable results.
9.8   Ben said, I'm worried about the predictable part.
9.9   Olivia gritted her teeth.
9.10 Karl said, Marx said that men make their own history but not necessarily as they please. He predicted the inevitability of the failure of the capitalist mode of production, and you yourselves can see the contradictions
I HOTEL
323
that make continuous acquisition of the earths resources and the exploitation of everyone to do so a finite proposition, but when it will fail and how, that's—
9.11 Olivia inserted, Up to us.
The smaller each separate "operation" in our common cause, the more people can we find capable of carrying out such operations, the more difficult will it be for the police to "net" all these "detail workers" ...
—V. I. Lenin, What Is to Be Done?
The working men have no country. We cannot take from them what they have not got.
—Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Communist Manifesto
10.1 Macario stayed behind in Montreal to scope out the scene, as he justified, but really to hang out with a Quebecois woman who invited him to her collective in the Canadian backwoods. Thus, he sent Ben and Olivia back on the long trek to Berkeley alone but together.
10.2 The only thing that Ben and Olivia could agree upon was that they would take a different route on their trip home, but at every fork in the road they argued vociferously about the consequences and advantages of taking one road or the other.
10.3 Let's head way south where it's warmer, get a load of the Bible Belt, suggested Ben.
10.4 First of all, I've already been down there, and just because you missed the Freedom Ride doesn't mean we need to do it this week. I say, since we're here in Canada, let's drive across and see it.
10.5 Good thing we've got this Benz with its deluxe heating system, he muttered.
324
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
10.6 But when the Benz drove off the icy road into a snowdrift in the middle of the night, they sat in the car on that empty road screaming at each other until Olivia ran from the car down the highway, the imprint of her boots trailing behind. Ben watched her figure growing distant and dark in the steamy rearview mirror, then tore out after her, catching up to grab her angry body and struggling to drag her back to the car. Fuck you! Let go of me! You goddamn bastard. Let go! The packed snow, a rising wall along the highway, punched back the impact of their flailing bodies, bouncing, kicking, and falling. Fucking bitch! You know how far the last town behind us is? You'II fucking freeze! Finally he held her in the cold embrace of the Canadian snow, their bodies wedged in a miraculous bed of billions of individual flakes, every hot breath melting a thousand flakes, every angry tear reproducing another thousand.
10.7 Olivia gasped, Look, and he followed her gaze into the northern skies, saw the distant and heavenly fireworks of the aurora borealis.
The only serious organizational principle for the active workers of our movement should be the strictest secrecy, the strictest selection of members and the training of professional revolutionaries. Given these qualities, something even more than "democracy" would be guaranteed to us, namely, complete, comradely, mutual confidence among revolutionaries.
—V. I. Lenin, What Is to Be Done?
XI
The ruling ideas of each age have ever been the ideas of its ruling class.	—Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels,
Communist Manifesto
n.i   Study Group #6: On Dialectical Materialism
ii.2 The ancients have long known the secrets of the universe as a cosmic and eternal whole in which everything is interconnected and interdependent, a push and pull of life forces, eternally dynamic and
I HOTEL
325
in motion, eternally changing, becoming and unbecoming, a cycle of oppositions that leap from one state to another, from water to steam, seed to rooted plant, life embedded in the death of the thing itself, and death embedded in the life of the thing itself.
11.3  Karl Kang said: A Marxist way of thinking can empower you by offering a way to see the internal contradiction of any situation.
11.4 Ben said, Olie needs a practical example.
11.5   Oh shut up, Benny, Olivia snapped, then after a pause: Karl, I need a practical example.
11.6 Karl thought and suggested: This is simple: the relationship of the slave to the master. You are a slave in that you must give your labor to the master, but the master is also slave to you in that he cannot be a master without your labor. Once you understand this contradiction, it is the beginning of your freedom.
11.7  O.K., said Olivia, so I get thinking to change my situation.
ii. 8 Right, dialectics is a logic of change, and change is embedded in every situation. It's a logic that provides not only hope but real possibility.
11.9 Ben offered, The next step is that we slaves strategize how to create the conditions for change.
11.10 Olivia continued, We plan the uprising.
11.11 So it is that in times of despotism, the seed of revolution exists, waiting only to be planted and watered. Strange how barbarian people can hold such secrets for centuries until a moment of appropriation, a great leap into an opposing future.
Only a centralized, militant organization that consistently carries out a Social-Democratic policy, that satisfies, so to speak, all revolutionary instincts and strivings, can safeguard the movement against making thoughtless attacks and prepare attacks that hold out the promise of success.
—V. I. Lenin, What Is to Be Done?
326
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
XII
Political power, properly so called, is merely the organized power of one class for oppressing another.
—Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Communist Manifesto
12.1 They drove south out of snow country, still keeping to the solitary roads, watching the asphalt stretch beyond and disappear beneath the gold Benz, sometimes quiet in their separate reveries, sometimes resuming their old arguments, but now with the soft bantering of a knowing that was of brother and sister, friend and friend. You're such a bullshitter, she said. You a/ways liked me, she added. Youre such a bitch, he smiled.
12.2 Back and forth, she sang Chinese folk songs and he, of course, Filipino love songs.
12.3 Driving in the night, he looked over at her dozing figure, her head resting against the window and the cloud of steam that obscured the dark window around her nose. He wanted to wake her to take notice of the horizon's starry expanse beyond the windshield before them, to tell her he had never seen so many stars. Instead, he pulled the car over into an open meadow, stopped, and killed the headlights. He rolled down the window and tested the air outside.
12.4 Olie, he nudged her. Quick. He pulled the sleeping bags from the trunk and spread them over the hot hood of the car. They removed every piece of their clothing and climbed onto the hood, lying over that sweet residue of heat and staring into the starry night, naked to the night air, pressing the hard and soft parts of their bodies into a soft rhythm, sparks and pistons for the silent motor, purring and traveling.
... an organization of real revolutionaries will stop at nothing to rid itself of an undesirable member.
—V. I. Lenin, What Is to Be Done?
I HOTEL
327
XIII
Let the ruling classes tremble at a Communistic revolution. The proletarians have nothing to lose but their chains. They have a world to win.
Working men of all countries, unite!
—Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Communist Manifesto
13.1  Study Group #7: On Practice
13.2 There are those whose fortune it is to dream of their futures and to live those dreams, to discover and to cultivate their innate talents and to realize and use those same talents, to live by their individual gifts and to be granted the blessings of praise and home among their people. And there are those who find a purpose for their talents and find that all their struggles and preparations are tested and given meaning in this purpose. There are those for whom the dream of their lives is also its practice, their practice fuel for their dreaming. But who among those favored also live in times of turmoil, in times of war, in exile and destitution, with the constant fear of prison, torture, and death? And what then is the nature of their dreaming practice, their practical dreaming?
13.3 Karl said, Theory must be connected to revolutionary practice. Practice is the way to knowledge and the development of theory. It's not practice versus theory, but to theorize practice and to practice theory.
13.4 A dialectical unity, suggested Ben.
13.5 A qualitative leap from theory to practice, said Olivia.
13.6 Ben announced, There's an empty storefront in the I-Hotel.
13.7 Olivia answered, Hook up the phone, and we're in business.
328
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
... we firmly believe that the fourth period will lead to the consolidation of militant Marxism, that Russian Social-Democracy will emerge from the crisis in the full strength of manhood, that the opportunist rearguard will be "replaced" by the genuine vanguard of the most revolutionary class . . . What is to be done?: Liquidate the Third Period.
—V. I. Lenin, What Is to Be Done?
I HOTEL
329