A great sunrise blushed behind the hills and towering buildings of the city's peninsula. Wayne pointed to a green speck rowing away from the Rock. Ria scrutinized the floating vessel. Stony said, "The Turtle?" then asked for confirmation, "There are two guys rowing, right?"
"Who are they?" asked Ria. "Hey! Come back!" she yelled into the bay uselessly. "That's Jack's Turtle!"
But when Stony blew his flute in melodic tribute, they seemed to look back in the direction of its cry.
Jack waved and said, "It's O.K. They're Indians."
"How do you know? From the island?"
"Yeah," he nodded. "Finally, they got away."
"Huh?"
"Shit," said Stony. "What are they going to do with your shoyu?"
382
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
2: Crane
For some people, this life begins with an interest in philosophy. Never mind that they don't know exactly what philosophy is; they just think it's something that can be figured out in the mind, like a twirling star that's an idea that blossoms into a grand explosion. Depending, that explosion might be a revelation or a revolution. Something inside the mind tells you that your thinking can be powerful. But then, the thinking has got to be put into practice, and how many middle-class activists checked into factories to find out what it's like to work? Even though this may have been a rite of passage, the truth is, really not many. How many graduate students of philosophy and political economics? Maybe there were others, but one was Ria Ishii.
A few days after arriving, the Indians would celebrate their first Thanksgiving on Alcatraz. By then the Coast Guard had abandoned their blockade, and the three Japanese Americans caught a ride back to the mainland. Jack stood by on the dock and gave the key to his station wagon to Stony with some instructions about the carburetor and said, "Catch you later, man." Stony drove everyone home to the beginnings of their separate destinies. Or, you could say their separate quests but same promises. A quest is at first just a question, something like: what is my purpose in life? Then the quest is to go out and find the answer, that plug of earth that can grow into a continent.
Sometimes, though, what you've got in the way of useful skills is the ability to sew, which you learned in junior high school when you started with the gym bag project and ended with the sequined gown with matching boa that you designed for the school musical production of Guys and Dolls. Well, Ria had those skills in her fingers, but up her sleeves she also had the skills of a young organizer who had fought to mobilize a boycott to redistrict Chicago's South Side wards to integrate schools, and who later organized tenants to bring down slumlords. Hard to imagine someone so young entering this arena in junior high school, but it's true that by the time she arrived at uc Berkeley, Ria was what you call a seasoned
I HOTEL
383
activist. So yes, technically, Ria could sew; socially, she could organize; and theoretically, Ria could think political economics: Marx and C. L. R. James, to be specific; she did her MA thesis on the Haitian revolution.
Of course, this information was scratched from her resume, and the manager, who couldn't tell the difference between a Japanese and a Chi--nese, gave her the job because he thought if she could speak English, she could be an interpreter. What did he know? His factory had forty seamstresses, three cutters, and three packers, all Chinese. By the time he figured out that Ria couldn't speak Chinese, she had convinced two other college students to join up who could speak Chinese, and they were agitating for a higher pay scale and better benefits. Once, they got almost all forty seamstresses to go to a union meeting of the International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union. But that was once. The Chinese ladies humored the students and went back to work.
Mrs. Lee explained things to Ria. "Union or no union, it's all the same. You got to get paid by the piece. Sew faster. Make more money."
The students reconnoitered and went out to do their homework like they were taught to do. It was true. Some Chinatown contractors made the seamstresses sign fake time cards to show that they were meeting the $1.65 per hour minimum. Union dues might get health benefits, but not much more. In Chinatown, you could at least leave your sewing machine to pick up from school and feed your children or check in on your sick auntie. Your boss was a paternal or a maternal figure who gave favors, made concessions, and took care of everyone. No one wanted to buck the system because no one wanted to lose her job. If you didn't speak English, what were your choices?
The statistics were bleak. Average pay for a six-day week was less than $2,900 annually. That might be a $i an hour. No overtime. No vacation. No sick leave. Probably no health benefits. Limited English and no prospects for other work. All the women worked to supplement the family income, most of them married to service workers and many married to old retired men.
Mrs. Lee explained again to Ria. "When I come here, my husband's already sixty-five, but he got the money to bring me over and make himself some kids. But what does he know about nice clothing and a refrigerator? How long he's been a bachelor?"
384
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
One day Sandy Hu, who was a poet, dancer, singer, and performer, came by to ask Ria for a favor. "Ria, do you think, in between your organizing and all, that you could stitch me a Mao jacket?"
She sat down next to Ria's machine and sketched out her idea. "It can't be just any utilitarian jacket though. We're not going plebian here." She looked at Ria significantly. "I know you don't approve."
Ria sucked her breath in.
"Listen, don't get huffy, because I saw those polyester dresses you were piecing together for the JCPenney clientele, and that's not going to make no revolution in no part of the world." Sandy pulled out a roll of chartreuse silk.
Ria said, "We'll need to stiffen up the collar area to make it stand up."
And that's how it started. The sewing ladies back at the factory studied a picture of Mao and copied the style, measured Sandy, and cut the patterns out of Chinese newspapers. When the silk chartreuse Mao jacket was done, everyone else wanted one too.
It's funny how these things happen, how suddenly one collar leads to the sleeves and to the pockets, a range of sizes—small, medium, large, and extra-large, plus fabric choices and slight stylistic changes. The Sandy Hu design was sold and commissioned everywhere. With this initial capital, Ria, the students, and Mrs. Lee bought seven Singer sewing machines at an auction of some failing shop and rented out basement space in the I-Hotel.
As it turned out, the basement was the site of an old sweatshop. The cutting tables were still there, the industrial lamps, the dust of thread and discarded fabric, spindles and bobbins, ghosts of old sewing ladies. One of the students remembered his mother used to sew there. Ria wandered around the windowless basement and thought she could hear that former generation of sewing machines clacking away in the past. In the meantime, she found a cache of old unused hotel blankets and sent it over to the Indians on Alcatraz. It took weeks to clear out accumulated junk and months to kill the rat infestation. Ria called her ex-boyfriend, Mo Akagi, who accommodated her request for an evening rat patrol, bringing in his cohort with pellet guns to take out rats the size of cats.
Then one day, they became the I-Hotel Cooperative Garment Factory. Pretty soon the sewing ladies were going to and fro, and the machines were whirring with industry and purpose.
I HOTEL
385
There's something about the thrill of a new business venture that makes you understand the draw of capitalism. You put the money in the bank and keep your accounting sheet, and you watch the numbers go up and down—you wonder about that surge you get when you move from red to black, from negative to positive, from three digits to four and then to five. But in this case, the thrill was collective; for the first time sewing ladies who had nothing had something: ownership and responsibility. Of course, at first, only Ria and the students felt that way, and in some respects, because they were proving what the books said about cooperative efforts. Their charge was to make the sewing ladies believe in the same thrill. In the beginning, the sewing ladies waited around for the students to decide and run things, perhaps skeptical but withholding judgment. The students went to school; they spoke good English. Let's see what happens. But as events developed, the sewing ladies had to realize the inexperience of youth.
Everyone hovered over the budget and tried to figure out where the numbers should go and why. What were their priorities? If they spent money here, what should be sacrificed or withheld where? It didn't take much time or coaxing to figure out that the sewing ladies were way ahead of the students in the way of financial savvy.
"No! We don't need that. What we need that for?"
"That vendor ask too much. We get better price!"
"You go back and argue for lower. Go back!"
"We not making enough money. We got to do piecework to make extra money."
"You go get contract for us."
"Get contract for pants. We do pants fast."
Ria and the students were sent scurrying. Everything went into high gear. Everyday they were out there knocking on doors for work. They found out what it really meant to be a Chinatown garment contractor, the middleman who had to negotiate terms with the manufacturers. In the end, there would be little profit margin for the contractor, who beat a path between the sweatshops and all the seamstresses sitting in their tiny one-room apartments trying to put extra pennies on the table. They got the sewing ladies to come along to meet the manufacturers, and they took field trips to the department stores to compare prices.
386
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
"This dress we make for $2! Look, selling for $30!"
They figured out that the manufacturer bought it from them for $2, sold it to the retailer for $10 who in turn marked it up another 200% and sold it back to them for $30.
"First, we get rid of contractor. Next we get rid of manufacturer."
Ria smiled. But could they make 100,000 dresses for national distribution? One dress at a time.
The women wandered through women's apparel, fingering the details on the blouses, pushing successive sizes of every imaginable style of jacket, dress, pants, and skirt along the racks. Mrs. Lee said, "In America, you have everything you want even if you don't want it. Biggest problem for America is what to choose."
Ria thought about Mrs. Lee's observation. "What do you mean, biggest problem?"
"Choose is easy," said Mrs. Lee, yanking at a sweater sleeve. "But really choose?" she asked. "No one in all world knows how. You come to America, everybody gets more confused. You have everything!" She gestured around at everything. "You," she stopped and looked at Ria significantly, even accusingly, "even have choosing foods for only cats!"
At night, Ria petted the factory cat, adopted to keep the rat population in check, and who came to sleep in her lap while she sewed. Lately Ria was there nightly, sewing piecework to make up for their deficit. Mo came around, sometimes as late as midnight, to find her sewing under a single lamp in the back.
"What are you doing here at this hour?" she asked.
"Rat patrol." Mo fingered the trigger on his pellet gun. "Thought I could do spot checks from time to time."
"Thanks," she said. "Just don't kill our cat." She went back to her sewing.
"Ria." Mo set the gun down and straddled a chair in front of her machine. "I'm worried about you."
She looked blurry-eyed at him over the spindle of thread and blinked.
"I know you're here every night. You're killing yourself."
"JB and I broke up."
"No shit."
"Is that why you're here?"
I HOTEL
387
"No, really, I didn't know." He stared at his boots for a moment and tugged at his leather gloves. "Is that why you're here?"
"No. See that pile?" She pointed at a stack of denim fabric pieces. "If I can finish that tonight, we'll be O.K. for another week." She lifted the pressure foot and fed another piece into the machine, joining the seams, mechanically guiding the evolving puzzle into a wearable garment.
"The ladies do eight hours, Ria. You're doing something like sixteen."
"No, they probably do another eight at home."
"Yeah, but they get paid."
"I get paid too. It's just different."
Mo watched her fingers flip and turn, pause and push, backtrack and cut, the artistry of the craft spinning up the same article again and again and again. "You're killing yourself, Ria," he said again.
"Look, how cute." She held up a pair of baby overalls. "Mo, listen, I love this work. I love what we're doing. You should see the women when they come in in the morning. They're beautiful. It's so different from when we began. I'm living for that. I can't let it fail."
Ria's already red eyes welled tired with tears, but Mo's responses were as automatic as her sewing. He reached for his gun. Spsst. Spsst. The pellets flew out in quick succession. The cat leaped from Ria's lap and pounced on the dying rat.
Olivia Wang marched downstairs from her offices in the I-Hotel and got in Ria's face, as she was often known to do. "So you're organizing a cooperative, but you need to make sure you aren't replicating capitalist models." Ria argued back, "Of course we're replicating capitalist models. How are we supposed to pay ourselves? Do you have a better plan?"
"I saw that Mao jacket you designed. You're creating bourgeois fashion." "Yeah, and we're turning Maoism into an exotic commodity." "That's right. And that's because you have no clear line." "Show me a clear line, and I'll show you the tension on a zigzag." "Don't get smart with me."
"Olie, don't bring your cadre in here and confuse the issues. Believe me, I struggle with this every day, but it's not like textbook Lenin."
"You have a responsibility to these women, and you're playing with cooperativism."
388
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
"No, Olie, the women have a responsibility to themselves. And yes, we're playing with cooperativism. You know a better way to figure things out?"
Olivia was quiet, but only for the moment. She and Ria always had a respectful hostility going. Their own histories connected back when they worked for SNCC. Being two of the few Asian women in an organization working for black civil rights, some thought they were interchangeable, or even the same woman. Interchangeability bonds you in humbling and exasperating ways, but the assumption of sameness may be grounds for a fight and certainly for competition. Olivia faced Ria off with militancy. Ria faced Olivia off with experience.
Similarly, everyone in the various organizations went tooth and nail at each other. Sometimes physical fights broke out. But what was at stake? The ultimate stakes for revolutionary change were high indeed, but the forks in the road were often so minor that only the most sophisticated thinkers understood the nuances. Ria and Olivia might argue that their decisions were based on the resolution of theoretical struggle, but how many others came to conclusions based on friendship, loyalty, and feeling? Ria and Olivia could jab at each other and come away whole, but how many would be casualties in these fights, where they had joined a group and therefore a struggle to match their passions with their beliefs like first love? To be scorned or threatened or put on trial by those you love for something you believe so passionately is a long hurt and a quiet dying.
Ria and Olivia were immune to these feelings as long as they could be in control, but control was something Ria was learning she needed to lose. The sewing ladies had begun to teach her something valuable about losing control and about dealing with change. After all, the sewing ladies had experienced big changes, lost their language and their homes to a new home. Whatever was useful to know in Hong Kong was not similarly useful in Chinatown. Mrs. Lee said, "Our factory is new idea. We get free to think new." She shook her finger with a warning: "Don't get stuck again."
The sewing ladies called a meeting, and by then Ria and the students were doing the listening. Mrs. Lee said, "We think new."
"We got to get child care."
"We make child care. Right here."
The students looked at each other. They were just trying to get the hang of running a sewing factory. "Are you sure?"
I HOTEL
389
"Yes."
"Also, we want American lessons."
"American lessons?"
"Yes, good English and thirteen colonies."
"You know, thirteen colonies, Declaration of Independence, and fifty stars to pass citizenship."
Meanwhile, two male students were in the back of shop trying to kill two rats caught in a garbage can. They were beating on the rats with a broom and making a commotion, yelling at the rats who wouldn't die by the broom. "Goddamn fucking rats."
The sewing ladies looked up from their meeting, and Mrs. Lee shook her head at the disturbance. She took something out of her purse and handed it to another sewing lady. Ria saw it was one of those Chinese New Year firecrackers. The sewing lady walked over to the students and cursed one of them. "Stupid Steve," she yelled, lit the cracker, and tossed it in the can. KABOOM!
When Olivia said, "You're supposed to be creating a viable model," Ria replied, "You have no idea." Ria stood up and went to a chalkboard on the side wall. She wrote: referendum, recall, initiative, civil rights. In a second column she wrote: market, price, renegotiate, percentage, cheap, stingy.
"What's that?"
"English lesson for today. Got to know the definitions and spelling. First column is for American history. Second is for garment business."
The next day, one of the manufacturers came in with work to drop off. Mrs. Lee whispered to another sewing lady, "He's the one that's cheap."
That sewing lady stopped her machine and turned around to the next sewing lady and passed on the word. "Cheap."
"Cheap."
"Cheap." Pretty soon all the ladies had stopped their machines. They stood up and approached the young man, who was telling one of the students his time requirements, when he'd be back to pick up the work.
Mrs. Lee started in. "We need to talk."
"Yes, we study market. This next batch, we renegotiate price."
"Your price too cheap."
"You got too high percentage. How we going to eat? Put food on the table?"
390
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
"You are stingy!"
"You give us higher price."
The women surrounded the man. He looked out, trying to get help from the student negotiator. Ria sat in the back at the last sewing machine and held her breath to keep from laughing.
One day Mrs. Lee said to Ria, "What your ma say about your work?"
"Oh, I don't know."
"I know you can sew, but this factory can't last."
Ria tried to protest.
"No, don't try to fool me. I know. Everybody knows." Mrs. Lee tapped Ria on the knee. "Some are saying you are killing yourself so we have to kill ourself too. This is beginning of the bad end."
Ria's face fell.
"But," Mrs. Lee smiled encouragingly, "I think different. You are too smart to be here. We don't need more dresses. We need more brains." She pointed to Ria's head. "Go back to school. Better to finish."
"I am finished."
"No, you are not finished."
"I'm not?"    .
"I'm finished. Next week I get u.s. citizenship. Thanks to you."
"That's wonderful."
"Look." Mrs. Lee pointed to a Vogue magazine photo of a thin blonde model wearing a silk chartreuse Mao jacket. "See?" she pointed.
"Hey!"
"You can't win," said Mrs. Lee.
"No?"
"Somebody steal your idea. Steal your culture. Every time." She paused and laughed, "O.K., Mao's not my culture, but I am Chinese."
Ria shook her head.
"But don't worry. More ideas where that came from." Mrs. Lee nudged her. "Listen, I tell you something. American Revolution is happening two hundred years ago. What's two hundred years?" Mrs. Lee spit air into the air. "But," she gestured, "first time is the last time. Can't make same revolution twice. Look at me." Mrs. Lee looked into Ria's eyes. "I know what you think, but I am not the revolution."
Ria laughed. "Yes, you are."
I HOTEL
391
Mrs. Lee shook her head. "I know students think East is Red, but this is not the East. So you better go. Go figure out a new way."
"New way?"
"Yes. We say the sun rises in the East, but now we live in the West. Now I am American. I'm not leaving. You go make a sun rise in the West."
Ria looked confused.
"O.K., manner of speaking." Mrs. Lee waved her hand. "You study, you find out."
"If I go, then what?"
"We got a plan. We're going into child care service. Chinatown Child Care." Mrs. Lee made like it was a banner across the I-Hotel. "Quit sewing. I never liked it anyway."
A while later, Sandy Hu sauntered in with the same Vogue magazine and threw her copy on Ria's table. "Did you see this?"
"Yeah."
"We should sue! I had the idea first."
"Sandy, it is Mao's jacket."
"O.K., but don't just sit there. Start sewing! How many have you even sold?"
"One hundred? Two hundred? I thought we saturated the market."
"Are you kidding? Selling at the Nihonmachi fair?"
But by the time everyone wanted a stylish Mao jacket, the I-Hotel Cooperative Garment Factory was another ghostly memory of whirring machines.
3: Cormorant
Every once in a while, someone disappears. In the meantime, the world turns in strange serendipity, and destiny, if there is such a thing at all, is not a simple destination, a straight predictable line to some inevitable end. Maybe you do get to turn, turn again, and turn back, dance a two-step, waltz in three-four, or chant a wakening that opens up a space of possibility, the great yawning mouth of your future. And maybe when you get there, it's not the future at all but the constantly evolving present.
Sometime after the first Thanksgiving, the band Creedence Clearwa-ter Revival bought a boat for the Alcatraz Indians, and the trek across the bay from the island could get you a hot bath and some occupation R&R at Warren's Bar in the Mission. This was news to Stony Ima when he accidentally found Jack "Turtle" Denny coiled up in a fetal position with his head bleeding onto the sidewalk. He rushed Jack over to the hospital and hung around intensive care for three days until Jack was finally somewhat lucid.
"Hey man," Jack looked at Stony with one eye. "You saved my life."
"You're supposed to be occupying an island."
"Right. Supposed to die defending Alcatraz."
"What the hell happened?"
"Can't remember. Guy came at me with a pool cue. Next thing I know, I'm here."
"Shit, you lose your memory?"
"I remember you."
"Remember this?" Stony held up a key.
"Where is it?"
"Parked at my mom's place in the Sunset."
"I was going to look you up."
"Mom's telling me to sell the heap," Stony teased, "Complaining it's rusting up her driveway."
"Maybe she's right. Time to sell it."
392
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
393