Mrs. Lee shook her head. "I know students think East is Red, but this is not the East. So you better go. Go figure out a new way."
"New way?"
"Yes. We say the sun rises in the East, but now we live in the West. Now I am American. I'm not leaving. You go make a sun rise in the West."
Ria looked confused.
"O.K., manner of speaking." Mrs. Lee waved her hand. "You study, you find out."
"If I go, then what?"
"We got a plan. We're going into child care service. Chinatown Child Care." Mrs. Lee made like it was a banner across the I-Hotel. "Quit sewing. I never liked it anyway."
A while later, Sandy Hu sauntered in with the same Vogue magazine and threw her copy on Ria's table. "Did you see this?"
"Yeah."
"We should sue! I had the idea first."
"Sandy, it is Mao's jacket."
"O.K., but don't just sit there. Start sewing! How many have you even sold?"
"One hundred? Two hundred? I thought we saturated the market."
"Are you kidding? Selling at the Nihonmachi fair?"
But by the time everyone wanted a stylish Mao jacket, the I-Hotel Cooperative Garment Factory was another ghostly memory of whirring machines.
3: Cormorant
Every once in a while, someone disappears. In the meantime, the world turns in strange serendipity, and destiny, if there is such a thing at all, is not a simple destination, a straight predictable line to some inevitable end. Maybe you do get to turn, turn again, and turn back, dance a two-step, waltz in three-four, or chant a wakening that opens up a space of possibility, the great yawning mouth of your future. And maybe when you get there, it's not the future at all but the constantly evolving present.
Sometime after the first Thanksgiving, the band Creedence Clearwa-ter Revival bought a boat for the Alcatraz Indians, and the trek across the bay from the island could get you a hot bath and some occupation R&R at Warren's Bar in the Mission. This was news to Stony Ima when he accidentally found Jack "Turtle" Denny coiled up in a fetal position with his head bleeding onto the sidewalk. He rushed Jack over to the hospital and hung around intensive care for three days until Jack was finally somewhat lucid.
"Hey man," Jack looked at Stony with one eye. "You saved my life."
"You're supposed to be occupying an island."
"Right. Supposed to die defending Alcatraz."
"What the hell happened?"
"Can't remember. Guy came at me with a pool cue. Next thing I know, I'm here."
"Shit, you lose your memory?"
"I remember you."
"Remember this?" Stony held up a key.
"Where is it?"
"Parked at my mom's place in the Sunset."
"I was going to look you up."
"Mom's telling me to sell the heap," Stony teased, "Complaining it's rusting up her driveway."
"Maybe she's right. Time to sell it."
392
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
393
"What's it worth? Nothing. Blue book'll give you a flat zero. At least it can take you back to Oklahoma."
"Got a pen?" Jack painstakingly carved some name and numbers onto a piece of paper. "This guy'll give you a good price. Tell him it's from Jack Turtle."
Stony took the information.
"Take the money. Are you listening? Half is yours." Jack closed his one eye.
"Jack, let's talk about this later."
He shook his head. "Other half, put away somewhere for me. One of those double-digit interest accounts that I can't get my hands on for another year." He smiled. "By then, who knows?"
"Are you kidding?"
But Jack had drifted off to a morphine sleep.
When Jack's contact handed Stony the large envelope of cash, he thought the guy must run a penny-ante operation, paid him a hundred with one-dollar bills or something. He wandered into a bank with the envelope, thinking about what he would do with fifty dollars, and if putting fifty for Jack in a double-digit account was even worth the time. But the bills turned out to be hundreds, and Stony watched in stupid disbelief as the clerk counted out a pile of crisp Benjamin Franklins.
When he ran over to the VA hospital where Jack had been removed to, there was what seemed to him to be an Indian powwow going on in the hospital room. Someone handed him a drum, and he beat his way through the chanting and bobbing bodies to make sure that Jack was alive. He handed Jack his Bank of America account book, which looked like a small passport, but there was too much commotion and too many Indians to talk freely. Jack smiled and nodded. "I had a dream."
"Oh yeah?"
"You get your carapace"—he pointed at his skull—"busted like me, dream's gotta mean something."
Stony nodded.
"I dreamed you went to Japan."
Stony pulled out his handy bamboo flute and took his place in the ceremony around Jack's bed. And just like that, Jack's dream unfolded.
JB had told Stony to get in touch with Kaz Ono when he arrived in
394
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
Tokyo. Kaz would get him over to Sanrizuka to meet the students and the farmers holding out against the takeover of their land for a new Tokyo airport. He got passed over to a Zengakuren student named Atari, who spent a long evening and several beers bemoaning what he saw as the dissolution of their movement. At some point, Atari looked at Stony as if it finally dawned on him and asked, "Where did you learn to speak Japanese?"
"My mom's a Japanese schoolteacher, a kibei. You know, born in America, raised in Japan. My dad was issei. He died a while back."
"Maybe that explains it. Your Japanese is all mixed up. Old. New. And dialects from all over Japan. Where were your parents from?"
"Let's see. Mom's Hiroshima but educated in Tokyo. Dad was from some place called Amami."
"Really?" Atari's eyes opened like he was seeing Stony for the first time. He pointed at his own nose. "I am from Amami!" He drew a map for Stony. "This is Amami-Oshima," he pointed.
"Hey, it's not even in Japan."
Atari nodded. "Closer to Okinawa." He leaned over and spoke almost confidentially. "I'm finally leaving Tokyo, going home. After that Red Army battle in Karuizawa last year, I can't be a part of this anymore. If you come, I will be there."
"I promised JB to check out Sanrizuka."
Atari agreed about first things first. He wrote detailed instructions about how to get to Amami and passed Stony along to some filmmakers who were trekking back and forth with documentary material on the farmers' holdout. They took him over to what was becoming the Tokyo-Narita International Airport. They pointed to immense swatches of farmland being turned into long landing tarmacs, previously the site of prolonged battles between protestors and police. It was pretty much over, they admitted. Their films could not stop the destruction of these farming villages. They would be moving on to another project up north in the mountains of Yamagata-ken. Did he want to come along?
"Sure," agreed Stony. "Why not?" He followed the filmmakers to Mag-ino-mura, wandered around in the rice paddies with his flute, slept with all the women, and watched them watch the rice grow. The camera captured everything in speeded-up real time. After a season of police
I HOTEL
395
skirmishes, guard towers, gasoline moats, sticks, and helmets near Tokyo, the filmmakers were now talking about a season of film that might take a thousand years. He could dig it, but he was on Turtle's budget; he followed the rice through one cycle, cut and harvested, and when the snow began to fall, something told him it was time to move on.
He pulled out a picture he had been saving. He had torn it from a magazine. It was a photograph of a wooden statue of a Buddhist figure sitting with one leg crossed over the other thigh and the right elbow leaning lightly onto the knee, fingers curved against the cheek in a contemplative gesture as if pointing to the serene features of its sleeping head. "Miroku bosatsu." Someone recognized the famous bodhisatrva. "You have to go to Kyoto to the Koryu-ji to see it. But why this bosatsu?"
"I don't know," replied Stony. "Just got this feeling." He felt for the flute in the inside pocket of his jacket, shifted the backpack over his shoulder, and trudged out onto the frozen road dusted with snowflakes. He discovered that all roads in Japan eventually lead to train tracks, and those tracks lead to a station. In a sweet moment, a train schedule could whisk him from a platform and make him disappear.
But in the next moment, he found himself at the Koryu temple facing the Miroku bosatsu. If the filmmakers in Magino were going for a thousand, here were thirteen hundred years burnished into sculpted wood in shades of deep purple and red. Thirteen hundred years in that tilted position of infinite meditation until one day the future Buddha may awake to offer compassion to a wounded world. No doubt about it: Stony asked Miroku for a sign, for some kind of message for the future, and then he left to cross all of Kyoto's historic streets, up and down, back and forth, until his movements became the woven fabric of the ancient city itself. If Stony was searching for Miroku's sign, nothing seemed to pop up, at least not immediately.
Meanwhile, he followed the sound of a shakuhachi to a shop in some part of the city he could never find again. The sage in the shop peered through the drooping folds of his ancient eyes and handed Stony the shakuhachi. "Do you play?" he asked. "If you play this one, you will not be able to stop." He chuckled his warning.
Stony drew the bamboo pipe to his lips, and the air from his lungs poured into the instrument like sweet liquor resonating back through his
396
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
fingers, into his body, until empty space surrounded him in clear totality. When he could finally pull the shakuhachi from his lips, many hours had passed, perhaps many days. He did not know. His stomach rumbled with hunger; his lips were raw and parched. The old man was no longer there, but a young girl sat in his place. She said, "Grandpa said to give you a good deal since," she paused, "he felt perhaps he tricked you."
"No, he didn't," answered Stony when he could finally speak. "This is the real thing." He dug into his pack for the Turtle bills and walked away with the shakuhachi.
Now, perhaps it was finally time to follow Atari's instructions to Amami. Stony found them as specific as his map of the Japan islands and their distance from the Ryukyu archipelago. A small ship left from Kagoshima, and he trundled on with the other passengers, heavily laden with bundles and supplies. He sat with them on tatami mats in the large open innards of the ship. During the twelve-hour trip, they shared food and tea, played cards, gambled, and slept. As the morning rose over the ocean, Stony could feel the air change, felt the damp warm wind fondling his neck and finally billowing through his shirt. Looking with others over the deck, the water spread turquoise toward beaches littered with pink and white coral, and thick walls of deep foliage rose in dense green mountains, clouds slipping by in soft smiles. If it hadn't been for the shakuhachi secured to his belongings, he might have jumped into the ocean and swam to shore.
Stony found Atari out in the shallow surf with a net, scooping out schools of shiny fish. "Well, you finally came. I've been doing some research in anticipation."
"Oh?"
"Yes. I think I've found your father's family here in Amami. Maybe it's a coincidence, but it's just a walk up this beach."
"My dad never said anything about Japan. I mean, he died before we could talk about it. Died young of a heart attack while diving for abalone."
"He was a diver? That makes sense." They both looked out over the coral reefs and watched a large tortoise emerge from a bubbling swirl and pull its heavy body to land. Broken coral and shells, ground over millennia into pebbled, gross, and powdered sand, peppered its underbelly, and the foamy surf rushed from behind to erase the jagged trail.
I HOTEL
397
"Yeah." Stony remembered his dad. "Died in the Pacific ocean."
"Come on," nudged Atari. "I'll take you to his old house." They trudged through the crunch of sand, picking up and discarding shells. Stony felt the pelting sand tossed up at the back of his calves and rubbed away the sandy prickle like black and white and toasted brown sesame seeds. Atari pointed. "That house over there."
Stony nodded and followed his own shadow toward a simple structure, its wood turned gray from the sea-salt wind, but when he looked over his shoulder to make some remark, strangely, Atari had disappeared.
At his calling, he could hear the answer of a woman inside. "Hai!" she called out and slid open the door. She appeared with an old wooden pestle for grinding sesame seeds, but suddenly dropped it in shock. It clattered to the floor and rolled over the threshold. Stony saw in a moment her entire life pass before him in a flash of great beauty, the same burnished age of the Miroku flying through serene and wrinkled time to terrible grief. She crumpled in the doorway, throwing her frail body at his feet and wept and wept.
Later he would understand. A woman came to the door and apologized. "She thinks you are my father, her husband returned after so many years." She showed Stony the photograph of her father, his father, once a young man. "The resemblance is remarkable," she agreed. "He left before the war never to return. We never heard from him again." Her voice trailed off.
That night he dreamed a dream. He saw himself staring at himself in a mirror in a future time, an older man much like his father as an older man, or was it his father? But it was his own voice, his breath pushed through his lips that formed the question in the mirror: Is that all there is?
That morning, he walked to the beach and stood barefoot in the clear shallow waters, feeling the waves surround and leave his feet. Stubbornly he thought he would stand his ground in the wet sand until the balls of his feet stood on sand posts, toes gripping and heels sinking, two long striations cut out across the sand chasing each receding wave. Looking down the long beach, he saw the patterns of other sinking pieces of debris: seashells, coral, broken glass and pottery shards, discarded bottles and buoys, driftwood, miles of trash circling a jagged coastline around the island, and sinking. For one long moment, or maybe forever, he felt
398
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
himself pressed between the praying palms of two supporting hands— one palm, the breathing surf before him, and the other, the roar of cicada at his back.
O.K., so someone there could say that Stony took two tabs and slipped Jack one, but that in itself would not account for everything.
Like they say, every once in a while, someone disappears.
By the time Stony Ima resurfaced, Alcatraz was lost to the white man again and Congress had designated it a national park.
I HOTEL
399