
1: Turtle Island
It's not easy to get into a boat with three people you don't know and go rowing off toward your destiny. If someone said, "Hey, get into this boat; it's going to change your life," would you do it? That's the trickery of being young. You figure, what the hell. I've never done this before. You've got time. Youth's supposed to have adventures. Even when there're folks who come rowing back from that trip and tell you what could happen or even warn you to turn around, you think you'll make your own mistakes but not those. But they never tell you everything. The past is always saved in someone's ego, so the really complicated and difficult things can only be known by living them out yourself. When it's all said and done, you too will save the hardest stuff inside your knowing ego. And you won't do it out of meanness, or duplicity, or vanity, but maybe because you just forget and get tired, because you've got to be an elder with a certain distance that they call wisdom, or because they never ask you anyway.
I HOTEL
373
A group self-identified by their Asian features gathered at Pier Thirty-nine under a full November moon, dancing through the usual lace of San Francisco Bay fog. Of course, depending, they could have been mistaken for Indian. It wouldn't be the first time someone recognized the features that claim the same genes that crossed the Bering Strait or canoed across the Pacific. Different tribes is all. The giveaway was probably the hundred-pound sack of Calrose rice. Wayne Takabayashi, a kid, probably high school, in skinny jeans and a pair of black canvas low-tops, was sitting on the sack when Stony Ima sauntered up, lugging a box on his shoulder. "Hey," said Stony to Wayne, "you waiting for the, uh, operation to the island?" He pointed his nose in the direction of Alcatraz. At that hour, it had the surreptitious feel of a dark spy operation, but no one had the code words.
Wayne looked up at a long-haired dude with a headband. "Yeah, who sent you?"
"Olivia. You?"
"Who's Olivia?"
"Does it matter?"
"Guess not. You know JB?"
"Yeah, everyone knows JB. So where is he?"
"Don't know. Where's the boat? Supposed to be transport, you know."
"How long you been here?"
"Half an hour at least. Shit."
"Hey," Stony pointed to an Asian woman walking toward them. "That's not Olivia. Know her?"
Wayne shook his head, waiting for her face to be revealed in the dark. "I don't know. She looks familiar." She had that long, straight hair parted in the middle that tumbled over a navy blue peacoat, but they all pretty much looked like that.
Ria Ishii walked purposefully, her hand gripping the handle of a large canister. Wayne noticed it was a gallon can of Kikkoman shoyu. She put it down next to his sack of rice and said, "So, this must be the place."
Stony shook his head. "Can't be too sure." He pointed at Wayne. "He's been waiting a half hour already and no boat."
"Well," said Ria. "Maybe we're not late."
"That's one way to see it," nodded Stony. "Shit, it's midnight."
Wayne pulled on his beanie and tugged his jacket tighter. The neons
374
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
from the wharf reflected off the black waters, obscured intermittently by low clouds of fog hunkering over the surface. The wind blew cold against the ocean spray misting his face.
Stony, who had worked up a walking sweat with his load, was wiping the steam off his spectacles. "Good idea, the rice," he approved.
"Yeah, what'd you bring?" asked Wayne, nodding at Stony's box.
"Case of Spam." He smiled. "I figure they're camped out there. This is camping food, right?"
"I guess so." Wayne shrugged. Then he noticed that he and Stony were both staring at the gallon can of soy sauce. They were momentarily mesmerized by the light that bounced off the slapping waves and glinted over the can's gold and red-orange carapace.
"Salt substitute," Ria defended.
No one said anything. They all looked out across the bay at the island, the dark concrete fortress perched on its rocky base, the lighthouse beam sweeping in a constant pulse. Maybe they imagined it, but they thought they could see tiny bonfires and smoke trailing darkly across night skies in the cold wind. When the last prisoner departed from the old penitentiary, he left the island to a single caretaker and his dog. After six years, Alcatraz was again occupied. Now the Rock was Indian land.
Ria broke in, "I met an Indian out there on the street who just pulled in from Oklahoma. He's got a boat hitched to his station wagon."
"No shit. The message is traveling," nodded Stony.
"He needs help with the boat. I told him I'd send him some help. But maybe he could be our way over."
Wayne pointed. "They've got the Coast Guard patrolling. See that boat over there with the lights?"
"That must be why we're stuck here. Something fouled up."
"How about it?" Ria pursued her idea. "One of you stay here to watch our stuff?"
"I'll do it," said Stony. He pointed at Wayne. "You could probably use the exercise."
Wayne was jumping around a bit to warm up. "Yeah," he agreed and accompanied Ria, following a small crowd of late-night revelers emerging from a wharf bar.
"I'm Ria," said Ria.
I HOTEL
375
"Wayne," said Wayne.
"I know I've seen you around somewhere."
"Yeah," said Wayne. "Me too."
They found the Indian dozing at the wheel in his station wagon. The back was packed to the gills with stuff. They knocked on his window.
"Hey." He recognized Ria. "I thought I'd catch some snooze. I been driving for almost three days straight, and anyway, I can't leave the boat. Too risky."
They helped him unhitch the boat, pulled away the protective tarp to reveal a wooden fiat-bottomed boat painted a deep green. Wayne scrutinized the boat's name, painted in golden letters. In the dark it took awhile, but he finally read: The Turtle.
"I'm Jack. Jack Denny. Some call me Turtle, too," said Jack, shaking hands all around.
They filled the boat with paddles, a small outboard motor, fishing gear, a sleeping roll, and a duffel of clothing. Jack shouldered the front, with Ria and Wayne coming up on either side. They marched down the old pier to the end, Jack's boots making rhythmic footfalls, dancing to avoid puddles of fish blood and the drenched scatter of paper trash and beer bottles. The stink offish and crab wafted about. At that hour, it was just them and the barking sea lions.
Stony was sitting on the rice and blowing plaintive sounds through a narrow bamboo flute. "Night guard came round," he announced and tucked the flute into an inside pocket in his jacket. "Asked me, was I one of those Indians, and did I know it was illegal to go over there."
"What'd you say?"
"Said I was Japanese, just night fishing like usual. Then for some reason, he started talking about raw fish. Said he knew all about it. Lived in Okinawa. Used the dipping sauce, too."
They all stared at the gallon canister of soy sauce again, and Ria smiled. "Hey," she said, introducing the boat's owner, "this is Jack."
They took the boat down a ramp to a docking slip and gently set The Turtle into the ocean. It bobbed there in the dark water, and they could see it would soon become like a piece of straw in the big bay. Even so, Jack looked out and said confidently, "Pretty calm out there."
"Yeah, well, good luck," said Ria.
376
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
"So we brought these provisions, see." Stony came forward with his case of Spam. Then everything got arranged in the boat—Jack's stuff, plus the rice and shoyu.
Stony looked up. "Oh man, here comes the guard," he rasped.
"How are you folks tonight?" said the guard.
Stony said, "These are my Japanese friends I was telling you about/'
"Fishing crew, eh? Where you heading?"
Stony said, "Oh, Marin side maybe, do some rock fishing."
Wayne picked up one of Jack's rods and handed it to Ria, who examined it like she knew what she was doing. She stepped out in front of the guard to obscure Jack and made casting motions. Under the watch of the guard, one by one they all climbed into the boat. Stony retrieved the rope, and Jack took the paddle and pushed off the dock. Wayne got the other paddle and tried to match Jack's movements. Ria waved good-bye to the guard, who called out, "Bring me back some sa-shimi!" After a short distance, they could hear his mutter travel along the waves: "Crazy Japanese."
"Thanks for covering for me," said Jack, a red man but yellow enough.
"So, now what?" Ria asked.
"So, now we go claim the Rock," said Jack.
"Oh shit," said Stony, looking back at the dock that was receding into the dark distance. "Why not?"
"O.K.," agreed Wayne.
"Just so everyone knows," said Ria, "I've never been in a boat. I'm from the South side of Chicago."
"Aren't there lakes there?" asked Stony.
"Lake Michigan, but I never sailed it. How about you?"
Stony said, "Just some fishing with my dad in L.A. off Pedro."
"O.K., that's something," said Jack. "How about you?" he asked Wayne.
Wayne shook his head.
"The Turtle here," announced Jack, "is making her maiden voyage in the Pacific Ocean. First time she's touched salt water."
"Congratulations," praised Stony.
"And not to make you nervous or anything, but I can't swim either," said Ria.
Jack glanced forward to Ria in the bow. "The Turtle's never let me down, but if there're any other last confessions, we'll hear them now."
I HOTEL
377
Stony said, "Ria, you wanna go back?"
"No, no." Ria practically stood up in the boat, waved, and pointed. "Let's go take that Rock."
"O.K."
Wayne asked, "If we pretend to be fishing, will they leave us alone?" In the distance, they could see what looked like a patrol boat cruising by the east end of Alcatraz.
"Maybe." Ria stuck a rod out and pushed a bit of line into the water, watching its skimming trail follow behind.
Jack and Wayne traded paddling from one side to the other, keeping a distant beeline for the dark Rock. Jack suggested, "Sink the paddle in like this and push back."
Wayne copied Jack's motions and probably thought about the last time he did this, on a canoe ride at Disneyland, but this was hardly the time to admit it.
"Why," Ria asked Jack, "did you decide to come? Oklahoma to Alcatraz is a long way."
"It's time."
"You do Nam?" Stony asked, noticing the medals pinned to Jack's denim jacket.
"That too." Jack paused. "You know the story of the Modoc and Captain Jack?"
Jack jerked the cord back a bunch of times until the motor coughed into life. They all settled into the Turtle and stared hard at the destined Rock. The story bloomed around them in a translucent fog.
Who knows—if that night guard hadn't come around to talk about raw fish arid make sure they paddled out to fish it, whether three Japanese Americans would have gotten on a little green boat with a Modoc Indian. And it was the damnedest thing how you could be Indian or Japanese but be just plain invisible. Now, some might say that making it through the Coast Guard blockade that night was a condition of this invisibility, but others will tell you that storytelling in itself is powerful magic, can get you from point A to point B, and you don't know how it happened.
Captain Jack, the man Jack "Turtle" Denny was named after, was the chief of the Modocs when they lived on the lava beds around Lost River and Tule Lake along the far northern border of California with Oregon.
378
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
That was around 1870, a hundred years ago.
"You know how the u.s. Army can have all the manpower, the guns, the copters, the bombs, and napalm and still be losing the war?"
"Yeah, man."
"So it was the same with Captain Jack and the Modoc braves. It was the costliest battle of the time. Government sent in everything and still they couldn't dislodge the Modoc people from lavaland. Hell, they couldn't even see the Modoc warriors who just disappeared into the landscape, merged into the black rocks and sage."'
Outboard motor puttputted its concerted rhythm, and the battle rose from the inky ocean in great detail: bloody guts of the killed and wounded, a frayed army of white soldiers shredded by their own crazed departure through jagged rock. And only a single Indian—his head blown up by his own curiosity—fallen. But like every Indian victory, it's still just a story. If the Modoc could hold the inhospitable lava beds, what pride should remove their claim? The same would be true of the Rock, unsuitable for any occupation other than a penitentiary or an Indian reservation—no transportation, no running water, no sanitation facilities, no oil or mineral rights, no industry, no health care, no agriculture or game, no education. It could be rock, could be lava beds. Story's the same.
Winning a battle could get you a peace treaty, but not necessarily the one you want and not necessarily the one they'll keep. The price of peace, if it has one, is never cheap. "So," said Jack, "when the negotiations went sour, the Modoc council voted to kill the white general." Now, the operative word here is voted, not kill; people forget that war is a collective action. The story is that Captain Jack voted to negotiate the peace but was in the minority. And then he was called a "fish-hearted woman" for voting that way. Well, he went back into that peace-tent meeting with five other Modoc representatives and asked to get the Modoc lands back—those same lava beds and the Lost River, and once again, General Canby said no.
"At that moment," continued Jack, "Captain Jack took out the revolver hidden near his so-called fish-heart and shot the general in the face. You could say the general lost face, but not Captain Jack."
Ria interrupted. "I swear it's not the story, but I'm going to be sick."
I HOTEL
379
Jack said, "You'll feel better if you just concentrate on looking out into the distance at the island." But when they all looked, they were staring the Rock in the face, its cliffs rising in gigantic shelves above an impudent turtle.
"What do you think?" asked Stony. "Go that way?" He pointed east.
"Got to be a landing somewhere."
Wayne lifted his right foot from the bottom of the boat and shook out his low-top. "You generally get this much water in the boat?"
Everyone looked down and saw the water seeping through. Stony saw Jack's dismayed expression and jumped down and started scooping the water out with his hands.
Wayne pointed with an oar. "Over there. We can make it."
As the boat approached a rocky outcrop, Ria tossed Jack's duffel, and then his sleeping bag. Jack jumped out and yelled for the rope. "O.K.," he yelled, pulling the tether and directing their escape. "Let's go. Grab his hand!"
When they were all safe on the rocks, Jack looked out at the Turtle, slowly filling with water but considerably more buoyant without its passengers. "Maybe we can tie the rope somewhere," Stony suggested, searching around.
"Nope." Jack shook his head. "Turtles gotta go. Had enough, I guess." He let the rope slip away, and they watched the boat bob around with the provisions—Calrose, Spam, and Kikkoman, the fishing equipment, and the paddles, flung like helpless arms.
"Hey!" a yell came from above.
The four looked up, wet to their waists and almost too frozen to move. A light passed over, blinding them, and then someone said, "Welcome to Indian land."
Someone else added, "Land of the free. Home of the brave."
The fifth day of the takeover would be dawning in a few hours. The feeling of excitement and purpose was palpable everywhere. How many times in your life do you feel that kind of power, the sort that unifies a people in collective pride and knowing? This time, you and your people get to choose. It's not an idle feeling, but one that you pursue in various forms, like singing the same song or cheering the same team or praying to the same spirit. A connective wave carries you to the same infinite space, and you feel more alive than you have ever felt.
380
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
Looking up from the bonfire, Ria saw the smoke meet the full moon. Two more astronauts had walked there only days ago, but no one seemed to remember. It was just another Apollo, another moonwalk. On Earth, Indians walked on Alcatraz. "One step for man, one giant leap for mankind."
Around the fire and after a change of clothing, the storytelling continued. The Indians of All Tribes had a comparative story going about Turtle Island. It seems like several tribes have a variation of this creation story, how the Earth was born from a tiny plug of soil on the back of a turtle. There are usually three animals who go in search of land. Some say the questing animals were an eagle, a loon, and a muskrat. Others interchange beaver and otter. Others put in for the toad. But there's pretty much some agreement that it was a turtle's back and always some minor amphibious animal who came back to the surface of the water with a precious plug of earth. Maybe it's a creation story, but maybe it's also a story about sacrifice and quest.
The morning rose over the island, and they had not slept. They walked to the eastern edge of the Rock and looked out toward the wakening city. Stony drew the flute from inside his jacket. Jack eyed it and asked, "What kind of flute is that?"
"Japanese call it a yokobue." Stony set the thing to his lips and pierced the morning with its birdsong. He blew a high-pitched wild yodel that converged with the barking sea lions, the low horns of passing ferries, and the clang of scattered buoys. Then Stony coaxed Jack: "You never finished your story about Captain Jack."
"Oh, yeah."
Don't think that if you kill a general, the u.s. Army will let you go. History tells us that the white man's pride is located in his laws, such that he will justify his pride and his greed, his great paternity and his superiority, with the great writ of his laws. Everything must follow accordingly. The white man will only give up or lose something if forced to do so by his own laws; in this way, he cannot lose face and continues secure in his pride that his law must be just. And so Captain Jack and four of his fellow Modoc warriors were tried and hung. Two braves, however, escaped the gallows and were imprisoned in Alcatraz. The Modoc brave Barncho died here, but Slolux lived to follow his people to Oklahoma. "Slolux," said Jack, "was my great-grandfather."
I HOTEL	381
A great sunrise blushed behind the hills and towering buildings of the city's peninsula. Wayne pointed to a green speck rowing away from the Rock. Ria scrutinized the floating vessel. Stony said, "The Turtle?" then asked for confirmation, "There are two guys rowing, right?"
"Who are they?" asked Ria. "Hey! Come back!" she yelled into the bay uselessly. "That's Jack's Turtle!"
But when Stony blew his flute in melodic tribute, they seemed to look back in the direction of its cry.
Jack waved and said, "It's O.K. They're Indians."
"How do you know? From the island?"
"Yeah," he nodded. "Finally, they got away."
"Huh?"
"Shit," said Stony. "What are they going to do with your shoyu?"
382
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
2: Crane
For some people, this life begins with an interest in philosophy. Never mind that they don't know exactly what philosophy is; they just think it's something that can be figured out in the mind, like a twirling star that's an idea that blossoms into a grand explosion. Depending, that explosion might be a revelation or a revolution. Something inside the mind tells you that your thinking can be powerful. But then, the thinking has got to be put into practice, and how many middle-class activists checked into factories to find out what it's like to work? Even though this may have been a rite of passage, the truth is, really not many. How many graduate students of philosophy and political economics? Maybe there were others, but one was Ria Ishii.
A few days after arriving, the Indians would celebrate their first Thanksgiving on Alcatraz. By then the Coast Guard had abandoned their blockade, and the three Japanese Americans caught a ride back to the mainland. Jack stood by on the dock and gave the key to his station wagon to Stony with some instructions about the carburetor and said, "Catch you later, man." Stony drove everyone home to the beginnings of their separate destinies. Or, you could say their separate quests but same promises. A quest is at first just a question, something like: what is my purpose in life? Then the quest is to go out and find the answer, that plug of earth that can grow into a continent.
Sometimes, though, what you've got in the way of useful skills is the ability to sew, which you learned in junior high school when you started with the gym bag project and ended with the sequined gown with matching boa that you designed for the school musical production of Guys and Dolls. Well, Ria had those skills in her fingers, but up her sleeves she also had the skills of a young organizer who had fought to mobilize a boycott to redistrict Chicago's South Side wards to integrate schools, and who later organized tenants to bring down slumlords. Hard to imagine someone so young entering this arena in junior high school, but it's true that by the time she arrived at uc Berkeley, Ria was what you call a seasoned
I HOTEL
383