4: Muskrat
The story begins with a stick of straw that, tied to the body of a horsefly, becomes a toy that pleases a little child, in exchange for three oranges that quench the thirst of an old woman, in exchange for a roll of silk again exchanged for an ailing horse that, given water, recovers to be exchanged for a weedy plot of earth that, cultivated, yields rice and recognition and, best of all, the love of a woman. This is how a poor man is rewarded by the gods for belief and compassion—belief in the value of a stick of straw and the compassion to relinquish its value without question. Some journeys begin with a stick of straw.
Wayne Takabayashi climbed four flights of stairs and walked down a dark corridor toward a distant rectangle of light thrown across the floor by a single lighted office. He stepped toward the pecking on a typewriter and the intermittent zip-clunk of the carriage return. When he got to the door, he stood in the rectangle of light and observed his father bent over a manual typewriter set on a desk among piles of papers, paper cartons of food, and coffee cups. Stacks of books and notebooks and boxes were all around the office in walled piles. A narrow path led to Professor Tom Takabayashi's chair. He looked away from his work, probably not because he felt his son's presence but because looking away into the dark hallway was a way of pursuing his thoughts. "Oh." He recognized his son. "What are you doing here?"
"Yeah, well, what are you doing here? Kinda late, don't you think?"
"Trying to get this article done for the journal."
"Why don't you move down to the first floor? The elevators don't work."
The professor shrugged. "They made them inoperative a week ago, but this is the only floor with electricity."
"Can they do that?"
"Hmph." He shoved aside the stupid question. "No heat though." He was wearing his heavy jacket.
"Roughing it, aren't you?"
400
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
"I've been thinking I could burn these books and get a nice fire going."
Wayne held up a red thermos. "Maybe this'll warm you up."
The professor recognized the family thermos that his wife, Jean, always filled with coffee, tea, or hot chocolate and sent along to every event: late-night meeting, football game, campout, rally, march, sit-in. Maybe he remembered the last time he'd seen it. Jean had sent it with him to, if necessary, bail out Wayne. She had filled it with soup, figuring that her son hadn't eaten. Wayne had passed the thermos, with sandwiches, around to the others of the Haviland Twenty who had taken over the Crim School for an overnight protest of its forced closure. Now the School of Criminology was just the ex-associate dean—one Professor Takabayashi, exiled to one cold office in an empty campus building slated for demolition.
"Here." The professor gestured. "Pull up a box." He shifted several stacks of books on the floor to form a makeshift table and set a mug and ' a tin of cookies on top.
Wayne poured his father a cup of coffee and set the thermos down. He looked over the books on the top of the stacks, among them his father's edited journal, Crime and Social justice. It already had the round stain of a coffee mug imprinted into its cover. On top of another stack: "Walden," he read, "and Civil Disobedience."
The professor smiled, took a sip of coffee, and closed his eyes. "Guess I've been exiled to my Walden."
"Not much nature here." Wayne watched the steam from the coffee swirl into the cold air.
"Forced self-reflection. Could be a pond, a jail, or a cold empty building. I wrote about it in this issue." He pointed to the journal. "Penitence, the eye of God, the Panopticon, and state centralization of incarceration." He leaned over the stacks of books as if they were a campfire. You could even say his face glowed. Wayne's father used to be a dean, with an entire office of assistants and secretaries and graduate researchers. He probably had never even made his own coffee. Now, when he signed off on the last lingering thesis or dissertation, what would be in store for Wayne's father?
The professor watched his son munching dejectedly on a sugar cookie. "I know what you're thinking, but this is not the first time I've been
I HOTEL
401
through this. Law is capricious. Like he said"—he pointed to Thoreau— "law never made anyone free. Men make the law free. So citizenship didn't keep me out of camp, and tenure didn't guarantee my job."
"Yeah, but why did you have to be the test case?"
The professor stared into his coifee and chuckled. Maybe he saw the face of his older brother John float to the surface. He remembered Johns face outside the kitchen window of that place they lived in in Idaho, digging up potatoes during the war. "You know the story about your uncle John?"
"Which story?"
"During the war. When he was studying up in Seattle, and the war broke out."
"Yeah, he went to jail."
"There was an eight p.m. curfew for Japanese. He decided to contest it. Walked around all night thinking he'd get arrested, but nobody bothered him. So finally he went into a police station and told them they had to arrest him. By the time his trial came along, the rest of us were in camp at Tule Lake."
Wayne nodded. He probably knew the story, but he wanted to hear it again. That's the way it is with some stories. You have to hear them again and again. They've got to get embedded in your psyche so you carry them as part of your life. So Wayne urged his father on into the late night. "So then what?"
"So your grandparents had to be escorted out of Tule Lake and up to Seattle to testify for John, but when they got there, authorities didn't know where to put them up. Technically, they were prisoners, so they were put in prison. My pop to the men's side, Mama to the women's."
"I remember. She got thrown in with the prostitutes. She was scared, so she played 'Beautiful Dreamer' on the piano for them. They loved her."
"When John saw our mother get up to testify for him, he didn't recognize her. The women had done up her hair, and she was wearing a load of makeup."
"Did that help Uncle John's case?"
"She was supposed to testify that he was brought up simply as a Christian Quaker." He passed Wayne the tin of cookies, and they both laughed.
Wayne poured himself some coffee too. Both son and father sat staring into their muddy cups. You might say they were looking for the bot-
402
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
torn of Walden Pond. The bottom would be thick with its mossy silt, but you could imagine a depth that is infinite, and it was that imagination, one of hope and moral truth, that they both reached for.
The professor continued, "John asked to do his jail time in Arizona, but they had no way to get him there from Seattle, so he volunteered to get there on his own."
"Coulda disappeared."
His father nodded. His brother's features rose again in his coffee. By the time John was hitching rides to a federal prison outside of Tucson to join pacifists, Hopi Indians, and other Japanese American war resisters, his family had gotten permission to relocate out of Tule Lake to an Idaho farm. For one last time, in Idaho, John came through the door with his duffel and sat down for grace and dinner, and for one last time, they were a family again. The next day, the future professor drove his brother out to the highway and left him there with his thumb hanging out.
Wayne fingered the last issue of the Crime and Social Justice journal. All the other contributors must have been Marxists, but this never bothered his father. A few years ago, Wayne had been busy reading Marx and Lenin, attending study groups, and trying to put out an underground newspaper for one of the political collectives. He flipped through the contents and recognized the author of one of the articles. "What ever happened to Aiko Masaoka?"
"Distinguished graduate."
"She wasn't there with us for the Haviland takeover."
"Heard she went to North Vietnam with some delegation."
This time, neither had to remind the other of the story they both knew. Of course, like every story, you could hold details on your end of it that only get revealed in the exchanging. So this must have been the time to get both sides.
"How long's it been?" the professor asked.
"Four years, maybe."
"Already? You were still in high school." The professor remembered that Wayne had interrupted his lecture.
"Dad," Wayne had said in a quiet panic, "I've got to talk to you. I'm in some trouble." The professor turned the class over to a TA and walked out with his son, walked over to a cafe on Telegraph, sat across from his
I HOTEL
403
son, just like this night, gripping a coffee mug, and braced himself for the worst. He'd been so involved in problems at school, his son's adolescence seemed the least of his worries. Maybe this would be payback time. But sometimes the worst is really a crisis of conscience.
The political collective had advanced from Marx to Lenin to Mao to Che to armed revolution. Or at least that was the theorizing. If Wayne went to the meeting that evening as he was expected to, he would have to struggle with the others about this question, about their decision to arm themselves. He was expected to spend weekends practice shooting and training in weapons and explosives. "They're," his voice had trembled, "taking it to another level."
"Another level!" the professor's voice exploded. "Sons of bitches!"
"I don't think I can do it. You, Uncle John. If the draft were still on, I'm thinking I'd be c.o., too. How am I going to struggle with them?" The professor must have remembered the trauma in his son's voice.
"They've got you, haven't they? Got you scared."
"No, no," Wayne denied, then admitted, "yes."
"It's all right." He tapped his son on the shoulder. "Listen." He got up. "You're not going to struggle with anyone. You don't have to go back."
There are moments when your father makes a decision for you that you could not yourself have made, and you remember that decision for the rest of your life. Wayne had not understood until that moment that he did not have to go back. He pulled his sleeves in front of his eyes, wiped away the welling tears in relief, and walked out and home after his father.
Weeks later, Aiko Masaoka and others had asked the professor about Wayne, that they hadn't seen him in J-Town again. Was he ill?
"You sons of bitches, fooling with young minds."The professor pointed a father's wrath. "If I catch you doing the same thing here in this school, there'll be hell to pay."
"I didn't know you told them that," Wayne marveled.
"Hmph." His father put down his empty coffee mug and remembered his deadline. "Have you seen your mother?" he asked.
"Yeah."
"Good."
"How's school?"
"I think I'm going to do geography."
"Makes sense. Land and people."The professor picked something off his desk and handed it to his son. "How do you like that?"
Wayne took the pen. It had a fancy casing, blue with gold trim and a gold point.
"Grad student gave it to me as a gift. Signed his thesis with it. You take it. I'll just lose it in this mess."
"Thanks." Wayne looked like he wanted to say something more, but his father had returned to his typewriter, his head nodding in assent and his right hand waving him on.
The next day, Wayne ran into a petite Indian woman in a pink sari. Actually, he didn't just run into her, he fell on top of her as he ran to catch the Telegraph bus and lost his footing on the oily pavement. Disentangling himself from pink cotton, he tried awkwardly to help her small body up from the ground, grabbing her in all the wrong places. "I'm so sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry," he babbled endlessly.
But she was laughing, in fact laughing hysterically, as if it were the funniest thing. She sat on the pavement and wiped away the tears of her pain that turned into laughter. Suddenly a wind whipped through, blowing at a clipboard she had been carrying and scattering its sheath of papers across Sproul Plaza. "Oh!" she exclaimed and jumped up, running after the flying papers. Wayne ran around too, stomping and grabbing and collecting. The damn things swirled around everywhere, slapped against trees and bushes and passing students. As he retrieved the papers, he caught sight of the pink sari fluttering across the plaza and among the crowds in a widening circle.
When Wayne re-encountered the Indian woman in the middle of Sproul again, she was breathless, her hair blown about and sticking up in places. He looked at the messy handful of papers and realized they were signed petitions. The top petition clearly had the wavy imprint of his old low-top across the face of it.
"Thank you. Thank you! I'm so grateful. If it weren't for you—" She pressed the papers to herself.
"What do you mean? It's all my fault."
"Oh," she seemed to remember. "That's right." Then she began laughing again.
"Let's go sit somewhere and rearrange those," he suggested.
404
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
405
"O.K." She pointed toward the student union. "Less wind in there."
They sat down and spread the papers across a table, trying to arrange them by page number. "We seem to be missing a page."
The woman's face fell, and Wayne got up. "Let me go look for it." She followed him out, and both went searching about against the buildings, in the bushes and gutters. Wayne collected trash as he went and finally rummaged through the trash cans before he discarded everything.
"It's no use. The wind had some need of it perhaps." She gestured to the air and turned toward the student union again. "Let's go back and have something to drink. By the way, my name is Roshni."
Back at the table, Wayne looked over the petitions. "Twenty-five signatures on a page," he moaned. "That's a lot."
"Well, we'll just start another page." She pushed a blank petition his way and searched around for a pen. "I seem to have lost my pen as well."
Wayne pulled out the pen his father had given him. "What am I sign-ing?"
"You are signing for an end to nuclear armaments."
"Good idea."
"Listen. This is serious. You have to mean it."
"O.K. I mean it."
She pulled the paper away from under his pen. "No, no. Maybe we'd better have a good discussion so you will really be sure."
"Is this going to take a long time?"
"Do you want to sign with an informed opinion?"
Wayne sighed, "Oh, all right."
"So this year, my country, well, one of my countries, India, set off an underground nuclear bomb at Pokhran in Rajasthan. Can you imagine? Such a place so rich in history, architecture, clothing. Now, I have no proof of this, but I believe that the Rajasthan desert is the very birthplace of the Gypsies." Roshni wandered into history, then back to her present concern. "They are calling this bomb a P-N-E." She pronounced each syllable clearly.
"What's that?"
"A Peaceful Nuclear Explosion."
"No such thing."
"Exactly." Roshni slapped her hand on the table.
406
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
At that moment, someone came by and interrupted their conversation.
"Are you Roshni?"
"Yes."
"Someone said to look for you, that I should sign your petition."
"Yes, yes, of course. Please sign here." She took Wayne's pen and offered it to the young man.
He quickly signed where Wayne had started to sign. "Thanks," he said and left.
"Wait a minute." Wayne put up his hand. "Did he mean it?"
"I certainly hope so."
"I'm confused."
"Yes, I know. So let me explain."
Many hours later, Wayne was still confused, but without stirring, he had traveled through time and around the world. The last time he had experienced this sensation of complete transportation was on a leaky boat to Alcatraz. That time the storyteller was a Modoc Indian; this time she was, well, what was she? Indian?
"Well, technically, yes," she said. "I was born in Mumbai—what you call Bombay—raised in Karachi, educated in Beirut." She paused. "Do you know your geography?"
He named the nations: "India, Pakistan, Lebanon."
"Oh, very good. Most Americans are confined to this big island and don't know where anything is in the world." Then she continued. "Then I was posteducated in Durham, North Carolina, and adopted by a family in Oaxaca. Now I'm here. Now that is where my body has been, but" —she gestured with small tilts of her head—"my ancestors were from Persia and China, and my mother was born in Japan."
"So your mother's Japanese?"
"You know, it's not always where you were born that makes you something." Roshni pulled out a folded piece of paper from a small satchel. "Look at this. You will be interested in this, I'm sure." She unfolded the paper and spread it flat for Wayne to see.
Wayne recognized the flyer announcing a meeting of the AAPA. "Asian American Political Alliance?"
"Yes." She nodded.
"And?"
I HOTEL
407
"I went to this meeting. I thought, finally, I have found my people."
"Asian American?"
"Yes, wouldn't you agree?"
Wayne scratched his head. By this time in the storytelling, he had experienced the partition of India, the civil war in Lebanon, and a civil rights sit-in in the American South. In North Carolina, she was considered to be a Negro and instructed to sit at the back of the bus. He had followed Roshni's defiant body, whether by chance or purpose, into the streets of Karachi, where thousands of fleeing refugees filled the streets, stood on Beirut's riviera watching American Marines slug across the pristine beaches with machine guns, and secured in her arms a Negro grandmother who swooned at the sight of her grandson thwacked across his head by a policeman's baton.
"They were very polite, of course, but also very firm," she continued.
"Who?"
"This AAPA." She pointed at the flyer. "They took one look." Roshni paused as if asking Wayne to look at her. "And they said no, you must be mistaken. So I had to leave."
Wayne tried to remember if he had been at that meeting.
"I had so much to talk about, especially this campaign against nuclear weapons. We Asian Americans must be against this destruction. I'll never forget my mother's face when she heard about the atomic bomb dropped on Nagasaki. I told you she was born there. Well, I was too little to know about the bomb, but I knew my mother's face. I'll never forget it because the next time I saw that look on her face was when she died."
Wayne picked up a stack of blank petitions. "Let me help you. I'll try to get these signed. To make it up to you."
"You will? But you don't have to make anything up to me. That's not a reason to help."
"All right," he said with some exasperation. "I'll do it to prove to you that I mean it."
Many weeks later, Wayne searched for the pink sari, some sign of Roshni in the plaza. He found her at a card table draped with a poster of a large peace sign. He handed her a thick stack of signed petitions. She looked carefully through the signatures and smiled happily. "But"—she
408
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
frowned—"Did you sign? You had better sign too."
"Are you sure?"
"Yes, yes," she laughed. "I'm sure."
Wayne signed and then he handed the pen to Roshni. "Here," he said. "I want you to have this. My dad gave me this pen, and every signature here was signed by the same pen."
"Thankyou," she murmured. "It's beautiful."Then, without hesitation, she untied a woven bracelet from her wrist. It had a pattern of beadwork delicately woven in colored yarn. "This was made by Indians in Oaxaca," she said, tying it to Wayne's wrist. "We call it a rahki, and giving it means that you become my brother."
And once again, Roshni transported Wayne into the past to 1905, when the poet Tagore urged Muslims and Hindu to exchange rahki bracelets to prevent rising hostilities created by the English when they ordered the partition of Bengal. "We say," she said, "that the most important relationship is that of the brother to his sister, and the sister to her brother."
They were silent for a long time in the noisy hubbub of the plaza. You figure the defiance of peace was right there in that center where a pebble or maybe a muskrat dove into Walden Pond, and the duplicating waves resonated across the living surface with the extending mystery of a mandala.
After a time, Wayne asked, "Why did you laugh so hard when I fell on you that time when we met? You must have been hurt."
"Oh yes, I got a big purple bruise. You don't want to know where," she laughed. "It's disappearing gradually. But you know, you tickled me, so I forgot about it."
Wayne looked at her and turned a bit red.
"Oh," she shrugged. "You're my brother now, so we can talk about such things."
Perhaps it was a few days later on a Sunday when Wayne walked out of his house to find a gray-haired woman applying a car jack to the front right frame of her car. She was cranking the thing up like she was the Triple-A come to the rescue, except that she was rather dressed up, wearing a skirt and stockings and with her hair done up nicely in a French roll. He might have walked on, but her blue Chevy was parked in front of his house, and she wasn't what you would call a spring chicken.
"Uh, need some help?"
I HOTEL
409
"Oh my, yes." She looked up. "If you could crank this up, I'll go get
the spare in the back trunk."
"Wait, I can get the spare."
"Well then." She passed him the keys to the trunk and continued cranking.
By the time he got the spare out and was rolling it over the sidewalk to the front of the car, the woman had her foot to the wrench and was unscrewing the lugs.
"Hey, let me do that." He ran over and applied pressure and managed to unscrew the first lug. Then he started in on the second.
She corrected him: "Wrong direction."
"Oh, O.K." Wayne had never actually changed a tire before, but under her directions, the entire procedure went quite smoothly.
By the time he was lifting the flat tire into the trunk, the woman pointed to his front porch and asked, "Do you mind if I sit for awhile?"
"No, of course not."
"I guess I don't have the strength I used to."
"I never changed a tire before," Wayne admitted.
"Oh, well, it's not rocket science." She stared at him a moment and asked, "Are you one of those young people who want to change the world?"
Wayne stuttered, "Well, maybe." He sat down next to her.
"I knew an old lady way back when who was a suffragette. And she told me that she was sure that all wars would end when women could vote because women were the only ones who would vote war out of existence." She paused and shook her head. "Didn't happen that way, but that's O.K. dear." She patted Wayne's knee. "You keep on trying."
They both stared out to the street at the car with the spare tire.
"Well, I guess I'm late now," she sighed.
"Where were you going?"
"My meeting. Quaker meeting."
"My grandparents were Quakers."
"Mine were Mennonite," she said, "but I've been going to the Friends since before the war. One day I went up those creaking steps and over that creaking old floor and sat down. At first no one talked, and then the talking began, and I just listened, but I thought, oh yes, I have found my people."
Wayne went inside and returned with two glasses of water. "Oh, thank
you." She continued, "So I started to go regularly to meetings, but then I wondered about all their talking. They could talk for hours. Talk and talk, and I thought, well, nothing will come of this. It's just talking, but when all the talking was finished, everything happened very quickly. I learned a lot from this. That was how I went to Tule Lake to teach."
"The internment camp?"
"Yes, you know, where the Japanese were sent during the war."
"My father and his parents were sent there."
"Oh yes? A terrible injustice," she said angrily and looked down the street. "Have you lived here a long time?"
"I'm just renting a room for now."
"I have old friends who live a few blocks from here. They are nisei. You are a sansei, are you not?"
Wayne nodded.
"The Utsumis. Do you know them?"
Wayne shook his head.
"Would you like to meet them?" Before he could protest, she handed him the keys and said, "You drive. Here. Let's go. Oh, I'm forgetting my manners. I'm Alma, and I'm so pleased to meet you."
As she had said, he drove a mere three blocks to a house similar to the one where he lived. "A long time ago," Alma remembered, "I came to this house every Sunday. That was just after the war."
Wayne followed her up the path to the door. "This house belonged to the Utsumi family before the war, so after the war, they came to reclaim it, but the people in this neighborhood were very hostile to the returning Japanese." She turned to look at Wayne significantly, and although he didn't respond, she emphasized, "Oh yes, that was how it was in those days."
They stood on the porch and Alma continued. "So my friend Laura Kennedy and I would come every Sunday when the neighbors would be home, and we would come to this door, and Marianne and Bill would come out with us, and the four of us would walk to the neighborhood church and sit together in the front pew." As Marianne herself opened her door, Alma exclaimed with delight, "We integrated that church!"
Wayne shifted awkwardly as Alma and Marianne hugged and he got introduced to a nisei woman who could have been his aunt.
410
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
411
"Oh, you're just in time," Marianne led them into the kitchen. "Bill is flipping pancakes."
So that was how after a while, Wayne found himself occasionally at a Quaker meeting, or at Sunday brunch with the Utsumis, or under the hood of one of Alma's several vehicles that were always in various stages of disrepair. Bill said, "Alma is a natural mechanic. If you want to know what's wrong with your car, let her drive it around the block."
One day Alma showed Wayne a photograph. "I've been trying to clean up my house, and look what I found."
Wayne stared at an old black-and-white photo of a group of around a dozen people gathered somewhere, perhaps in a garden or at the front of a house. He pointed: "Is this you?"
"Yes, and this is Marianne, and this is Bill."
"And the others?"
She named the others one by one, a mixed group of African Americans, Japanese Americans, Caucasian Americans. "This is our group!" she said with an exclamation.
"What year is this?"
"Well, after the war—1947 maybe."
"What did your group do?"
"Direct action!" Alma practically yelled. "After the war, there was so much prejudice and hatred of the Japanese, so we would choose places to go, like restaurants, and we would all go in and sit down together to be served. Oh yes!"
"Like a sit-in?"
"Oh yes."
Wayne smiled broadly and repeated, "Oh yes!"
"I also found this," she said. "It's yours."
"What is it?"
"Pink slip to that old Ford pickup back there. Now that you've got it running, it ought to be yours. I certainly don't need it."
"I don't know, Alma."
"Oh, take it," she said. "You're going to need it to do that geography of yours."
Wayne tugged with his teeth and untied the woven bracelet he had never removed since Roshni had tied it to his wrist. "It's time to pass this on."
Sometime in the summer after graduation, Wayne drove by Alma's place with the truck with camper shell on top, packed with all his equipment and supplies. "Hey, Alma, I'm headed south to Mexico. What do you think?"
"I think you should go. Just come back once before I die."
"Alma, you're going to live to be a hundred."
"I guess you're right, because I intend to see the millennium." Alma had her hair done up in a bun on the top of her head, something like a topknot. Roshni's woven rahki was carefully tied around her silvering knot of hair.
Wayne gave Alma a big kiss on the cheek.
Well, you try to imagine the near future and what might be exchanged for an old Ford pickup.
412
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
413