5: Tule Lake
When it's all said and done, you might have a compilation of events, and you might have a story with meaning. Someone says, don't worry about the details, just get the stories. Someone else says, get the details and the hard facts, and then you can build a case for a story. Someone says a good story helps you to remember, but someone else says that everyone remembers differently. Everyone's got a version of the same story, or maybe there's no such thing as the same story; it's a different story every time.
But those're just stories that may or may not be important in themselves. What about the stories that are visions of the world, visions of reality that hold people inside, inside the reality of the world, inside their minds that see that world, and in society among each other? What about those stories that tell you how to live and how to stay alive and how to die? Which are the stories you take inside your mind to live by and to create a world, to teach your children, to wake to in the morning, to face each day? Some say those aren't just stories; others say that's all they are, just stories, and that's plenty enough.
In the Japanese American version of the Turtle Island story, you got a crane and loon and muskrat that go searching for a plug of earth in a lake that turns out to be a dried-up, desiccated lake called Tule Lake. You didn't imagine that enemy non-aliens, or for that matter anyone native to that land, would be exiled to any real lake, not Walden Pond, not an orchard of apples, not a jewel in the desert, not a mountain with a heart. Still, you know that it is the people who occupy the space, whether a reservation or a concentration camp, who draw the water, plant the apples, build from the raw jewel, cause the heart to beat.
Now, if after a hiatus of seven years you can bring the same three strangers back into the same boat, I'd say that's synchronicity. Of course, you'll say that's just some storytelling, some O. Henry kind of surprise ending, some paradox or irony or koan to contemplate long after the story's told. But how many times do you wander into the stories that turn out to be your own life, and someone says, I know that story; it turns out
414
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
like this. And you say, No it doesn't; my life is different; it's got its own consequences, its own endings. Don't be so sure.
There's not much at Tule Lake that anyone can see, just open, endless, dusty acres of land with sage and broken junk, some of it piled into hills, most scattered across the terrain. In one direction, you see what the Japanese called Abalone Mountain. In the other, Castle Rock. If you make it out to one far end, you might be able to see the snow on Mount Shasta, but the vision of snow will make your throat parch under that harsh sun, with not a tree or cool spot in sight. If you scratch your boot toe in the dry earth, you might scrape up these tiny pink seashells from another time. No matter, the revelation of a scorched earth transformed from a wet one won't make you swallow anything but your own dry spit. They were calling themselves pilgrims.
Ria turned to Wayne and said, "I know you from somewhere." Wayne nodded, then both of them said simultaneously: "Alcatraz." In an impromptu stage area, a guy with a headband in a happi coat was playing a flute. He dedicated his flute song to the memory of a sansei named Sen Hama, who died several years ago in a motorcycle accident up there on Castle Rock. He had been one of the first pilgrims to Tule Lake. Ria and Wayne remembered a piercing birdsong wailing across the San Francisco Bay.
Stony approached his old boat companions, an arsenal of bamboo flutes in a large brocade pouch behind his shoulder like an archer's sling. "Hey," he, said, "you're not going to believe this but"—he pointed with his flute somewhere out there between Abalone and Castle Rock—"Jack Denny's living on a ranch right over there."
Wayne still had Alma's old pickup; it had survived crossing the Mexican border and back. Now the old Turtle contingent piled in and took off in the direction of Stony's pointing flute. Jack met them like it was just four stories ago. He said, "Welcome to Modoc Country." They answered, "Land of the free. Home of the brave." Jack announced, "We got a sweat going here. How about it?" This time maybe they thought they knew and trusted each other, even though it had been seven different years of separate experiences. Their lives had walked in parallel lines until they bent in ways that led them to cross at this particular moment in time. Maybe over the years, they had
I HOTEL
passed each other without knowing it, met folks who knew them by degrees. Maybe it was the meaning of Tule Lake, and that alone was enough. They all passed through that smoky fog of sweet sage and crawled into the coal black heat of Jack's sweat lodge.
Jack pitched in the red hot rocks with a big fork, and the open flap went down. Now, you've got to sit in the pitch-black sauna of the Earth's womb for four seasons. Each time the flap opens, more red hot rocks are added, some sage and some cedar, and a splash of river water. Incense rises, and the steam spits. And the heat envelopes you until you bleed your dirty waters, grab the earth, and sink your cheeks into its cool dark soil. The hot darkness squeezes you like a wet sponge, and your waters get replaced for visions.
In the first vision, Jack recognized a man who is his uncle in his younger days. Uncle Albert is tracking something that looks like giant footprints across the desert. Al used to tell stories of meeting up with the Sasquatch itself, but he could never completely prove what he had seen. He could only draw you pictures of this big hairy beast that rose taller than a grizzly on two big feet.
But one day, he tracks it to a barbed-wire fence, and when he looks up, there is a tower rising into the sky with a soldier posted up on its lookout, pointing a gun in his direction. "Hey, get away from that fence," the soldier warns.
He backs away. "What's this place?"
"u.s. Government property."
Uncle Al takes a better look at the property and sees people, in fact an entire tribe of them—men, women, and children—coming and going from tarpaper barracks. Later, he would climb up to Castle Rock and get a bird's-eye view of the whole situation.
"What reservation is this?" he asks.
"Hey," the soldier barks. "You aren't a Jap are you?"
The flap came up, and the light filtered in with a dusty breath and another set of burning rocks. The flap went down again with the promise of another vision.
This time, Wayne recognized his grandmother, although long dead before his birth. Maybe he knew her from old photographs. She sits at a piano playing the Stephen Foster tunes that his father had said she knew.
Behind her on benches are children trying to sing along. I dream of Jean-nie with the light brown hair.
A white woman moves into view and sits at the piano next to Wayne's grandmother. Scrutinizing her features, Wayne saw that it was Alma, with brown hair but still done up in that French roll of hers. The two women nod at each other in agreement and together play the Shaker tune "Simple Gifts."
When the song ends, the children come forward with a small box, a gift for Alma. It is a necklace crafted from the pink and white seashells sifted from the earth around the barracks. "Alma," they say. "We picked these shells all by ourselves!"
"I picked this biggest one."
"But we didn't go near the fence. No, we didn't."
Wayne's grandmother places the gift around Alma's neck, and they all accompany her as far as the gate, waving to her beyond the stationed soldier, watching the barbed-wire cut across her diminishing figure. •
The flap came up a third time with the same ceremonies, and the third vision commenced.
Ria saw a nisei couple with a baby standing at a dock before the ramp of a large cruise ship. The workers scurrying around and the passengers climbing the ramp are all Japanese.
When the man speaks, Ria recognized the voice of her father. He is handing her mother a thick envelope. "This is the repatriation paperwork sent by Mr. Wayne Collins," he says. "Don't lose it."
"What about yours?"
"I have mine. And Ria is fine." He puts his finger in the tiny hand of the baby girl. "She's an American." Then he takes her in his arms and bounces her a bit.
"We were always American," Ria's mother speaks firmly. "I will write to you when we arrive in Chicago."
"It'll be just another year in Tokyo or maybe here in Yokohama, and I'll be there," he promises. "I just hope there'll be work for me."
"We can't work for the occupation forever. One day the Americans will have to leave Japan."
The ship's horn blasts, and they look up in resignation. Ria's father passes Ria into her mother's arms. Ria saw over her mother's shoulder
416
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
417
her father's waving hand, waving and waving and waving.
And so the flap flew up the fourth time, and Stony anticipated the last vision. He saw a Japanese man knock on the door of a camp barrack. A young woman with a small child, a toddler girl of about two or three years, appears at the door, and he removes his hat and bows. He steps into a bare room where the woman offers him a seat on a crate next to a simple wooden table. She sets a kettle on the potbellied stove, then comes to sit at the table. "Ima-san," she says in Japanese. "I'm sorry it's such a sad place to receive you."
"That's not true." He shakes his head. He watches the little girl dance around the room. "See, Yasuko-chan makes this a happy house."
Now Stony understood they were his mother and his older sister Yasuko. His mother was already a widow when she arrived in camp. She says, "You know Seiji died just as she was born. She never knew her father. Now we've come alone to this camp. But"—she gets up to pour hot water for tea—"I thought you must have taken the last boat back to Japan. You did not have to come here."
He shifts on the crate uncomfortably, then says, "I was so wrapped up in my studies." He places a book on the table. It is a worn copy with the thin leather cover rubbed to lighter shades of brown along the spine and corners. "I want you to have this. It's one of the only books I brought with me to camp."
She picks up the book and marvels. "Tanka poetry," she smiles with some embarrassment.
He tugs a small piece of newspaper clipping exposed in the pages of the book. It is the notice of the honor of the woman's Imperial award for her tanka and the poem itself.
"You kept this?"
He nods.
"Ah, well," she sighs. "And now we are at war." She pushes the book back to him across the table. "I cannot accept such a precious gift."
He stops the returning movement of the book. "To be honest," he says, "I could not get on that boat. I could not return. Even now I don't know if such a thing is possible."
She looks at him with some confusion.
And he begins, "Seiji was my good friend, so." He stops, his words stuck. He rises from the table and reaches for his hat.
418
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
She steps forward with the book of poetry in both hands. "Ima-san," she says quietly. "I am very honored by your gift."
The flap to Jack's sweat lodge opened for the ending ceremony, by which time they emerged to dusk, the last glimmer of purple and red vanishing with the setting sun.
"Funny," Ria said. "I knew I was born in Japan, but I never knew why."
"Same here," said Stony. "I knew I was born in camp, but I never knew why."
The next day, they all climbed into the cabin and the bed of Wayne's pickup and took the roads into the lava beds, and Jack pointed out all the significant sites of the Modoc War: Captain Jack's stronghold, lava tubes, petroglyphs. But the Modoc War was just one rebellion. Like the story goes, you can win a rebellion but not for long. And then there was the Vietnam War. Jack said, "I'll tell you a secret, why the war had to end."
"Antiwar protest?"
"Yeah, that, but really it was because we"—he pointed to himself, a vet—"we refused to fight. Got sick of the killing and just stopped, you know?"
Funny how a group can be bound by refusal and resistance. Maybe something does get passed along. Could be ghost stories, something in the deep places of your psyche that's always hungry, hungry for intangible things that get defined later. You might go on a quest to find the answers, but sometimes those ghosts are right there next to you, following you around, holed up inside your being. Then one day, it all gets sweated out.
Jack pointed to a stretch of marshland. "Stop over there." They all climbed out of the truck and trudged behind. Jack dug his hands into the mud and water and pulled up a tall clump of the grass. He walked back to the truck and retrieved an empty coffee cup, stuffed the slimy soil and grass into the cup, and handed it to Wayne. "This is rule. Indians use this to make baskets, hats, canoes."
"Cool, I'll take it." Wayne took the cup of rule and handed Jack the keys to the truck. "Can you use a truck?" he asked.
"You're kidding, man." Jack put his hands up.
"No, I'm not. It was given to me to give away."
"Only if I can paint it green," said Jack.
I HOTEL
419
They piled into the back of the newly dubbed Turtle with Jack in the driver's seat. He pumped the engine into a slow roar and tried the horn. Everything worked. Wayne pulled his cap over his head and secured the tule, and Ria passed around the water and a bag of chips. The Turtle revved into reverse and forward, Stony seated on the tail and blowing a high wail through his yokobue, and the marshland refuge came alive in answer, a thick, winged, and screeching chaos of thousands of ducks and swans and geese.
Indians will tell you that, yeah, there are prophecies and they do come to pass, but they'll also tell you that prophecies are like any other story— they can be changed.
1974: l-Migrant Hotel
42O
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA