lies and pull out the eggs. Red orange, slimy grape clusters shudder in your hands. You holding salmon caviar in one hand and the caviar that makes the wine in the other. Holding it tender like babies because this stuff will travel to the mans table. Who's gonna put it there? I'm gonna put it there. Set the caviar on thin crackers with lime zest. Pour a chilled bottle of sparkling wine. Make him look gracious in a room full of beautiful women, tinkling glasses, fluttering candles, and chandeliers. I'm holding my hands out with the open palms of sea and land caviar. Holding them out like offering. Then take it away. Close the fists and squeeze. Squeeze hard.
442
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
One day Macario comes by my room. He's holding a small cardboard box. He says, "Look what I found back of the closet in Joe's office."
I scrutinize the label on the box. "Crematorium," I make out. Then "Pio Rosete."
Macario pulls open the cover. Inside, there's a plastic sack of gray ashes.
"It's Pio," I say. "What's he doing here?"
"Maybe nobody claimed him. No next of kin."
"How long it's been since the fire?"
"Awhile."
I scratch my head. "That's what the guys say."
"What?"
"Pio's ghost coming around bothering them. Sometimes he's got his banjo. Other times, maybe you playing rummy, and you lose your card. You find it somewhere else you never expect."
"Guys are cheating."
"That's what they're saying. Pio was a good cheater."
"You believe it?"
"If you get him on your side, maybe you could win."
Macario chuckles, but then he looks at the box and gets serious again. "So now what?"
"Maybe he knows who set the fire. We never think to ask him."
"Look," Macario says. "You figure this out. You knew him." He hands me the box and walks away.
I put Pio down in the chair and sit in my room. Now I get these ashes for a roommate. "Pio," I say. "You remember that song? How does it go?" I hum a few verses. Pretty soon I remember the whole song and sing everything. I think, did he get burned up with his banjo? Probably. Nothing left of his old room. I think, that's Pio all right. How else could I remember the whole song?
I HOTEL
443
Over time we get a committee going to figure out something for Pio. Put his spirit to rest once and forever. Also we gonna honor the other guys who died: Salermo and Knauff. We do a thing on March 16, anniversary of the fire. Everybody agrees. Too late for a funeral. Who's gonna mourn? We got our own troubles. There's gotta be food and music. Somebody says lechon baboy. Gotta be authentic pig roast over coals. I say, "What the heck you talking? We gonna burn the I-Hotel down this time for good."
Alfred suggests, "How about doing it Hawaii style, in the pit? That way there's no open fire."
"In the imu?" I say.
"Watchu call it?"
"Imu. Pit. Same thing. Before you bury the pig, you gotta burn wood and rocks for maybe four to five hours."
"Felix, you don't worry about the logistics. You the cook. You just tell us what to do. We do it."
Bunch of guys sign up for the food committee. Other bunch for the music. What can I say? It's a democracy.
But then someone says, "You want my humble opinion, Pinoy pig better than Hawaii pig."
I smack the side of my head because I know what's coming.
Someone else has to say, "Humble opinion? What's a humble opinion?"
"Lechon baboy got that crispy skin."
"You don't know what you talking. Kalua pig comes out so tender melts in your mouth. And the flavor." He smacks his lips.
"Think about it. You turning that baby on the bamboo pole, take turns for how many hours? Take it easy. Drink beer. Gets to be that deep red color. You get the reward: the crispy skin."
"Skin? What about the rest of the pork? Wrap it up in banana leaves and slow cook. O.K., you work to dig the pit, heat the rocks, bury it good. But after that, you go play, afternoon surfing, forget about it. Come back, you got yourself one luau."
"Yeah, you do that. You try surf in the fucking freezing bay."
Now we got an argument. Everybody on the food committee taking sides. They split down the middle. I throw my hands up. Revolution, O.K., but what cook believes in democracy?
Macario asks, "What's the matter? How about Pio's celebration?"
444
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
We go down back of the hotel—basement used to be a diner joint in the old days. Got the old counter and the six original stools, stove, fridge, everything. I clean it up and every now and then cook up a storm. Macario takes a stool, and I get a pot of rice going. Anyway, rice is basic. Then open up one of those square cans of Spam. Cut it up. Then green onions. Chop that up. Fry up the Spam with the onions. Meanwhile, open a can of chili beans. Could be turkey or beef. Could be Stagg. Heat up the chili.
"What're you making?"
"Hiro's dish."
"Oh no. Not that."
"Why not? I tell you this is the most original stinky thing you gonna eat. Beats anything Pinoy."
By now he knows this might be the only thing can cheer me up. "That bad, huh?"
"Maybe we go back to the first idea."
"What's that?"
"We do a funeral."
I prep the last ingredient: natto. Stinky, brown, snotty, fermented beans. Macario says smells like concentrated dirty socks. I tell him Hiro should know. Japanese invented this. Who'da thought? Same ones invented Zen. Whip the natto up with soy sauce and mustard. Crack in one raw egg. Whip it up some more. Touch of cayenne. Macario closes his eyes. I got to smile. I feel better already. I get the bowls ready. Pile up the rice, the chili, the fried Spam, the natto. Sprinkle more chopped scallions on top for garnish. For Macario, minus the natto.
Now we hunker down. Eat first. Think later.
Macario says, "I thought the guys decided."
"What they gonna decide? Pit or spit?"
"I know how you feel. I got the same problems."
"What's that?"
"CPA. ACC."
Now I got to laugh. You hang out across the street from the hotel, you can see the dynamics clear as day. Picture this: middle door is the International Hotel entrance. Got the original square pillars and the old buttresses. These days painted nice. Door to the left is the Chinese Progressive Association.
I HOTEL
445
Door to the right is the Asian Community Center. O.K., depending on your point of view. You coming out the hotel entrance, door to the left is ACC, and door to the right is CPA. Both of them trying like crazy to be on the left. What's the difference? Same difference. Some days maybe they got the same program. Showing the same goddamn Chinese movie. East is Red. You get confused. Go down one side. Go down the other. Same long-haired kids. Same posters of Mao. Same PRC flags. Through the looking glass.
I look around. "Which side we on now?" I ask.
"ACC," Macario answers.
"Are they pit or spit?"
"Shit."
"You know, before we got the three-year lease, didn't have this kind of problem."
"Everyone was too busy working on the hotel."
"I think I'm missing the noise. Pounding, sawing, scraping, sanding, screwing-screwing, banging-banging-banging." I get excited. "Heh heh!"
Macario shakes his head. "Dirty old man."
"Even missing the smell. Ammonia and fresh paint. Insecticide and rat poison."
"That's a lie. You hated the smell."
"O.K." I gesture with my chopsticks. "I'm lying."
Macario is watching the sticky brown spiderweb grab the Spam and chili in my bowl. I slurp it up. The web sticks to my lips.
I say, "Saving the building is not the same thing as saving the hotel. Maybe anyone can save the building. Harder to save the hotel."
"O.K.,"he agrees.
"That's why"—I got to stop to wipe my mouth—" the guys got to argue pit or spit. Same arguments everywhere. No matter what, we got a three-year lease, time to take care of ghosts and shit like that. Maybe we succeed, but no matter what, three years is"—I kiss the air—"poof."
Macario sighs. He doesn't know. He's too young. Three years is still a big percentage of his life. "So," he asks, "pit or spit?"
I slap the table. "We gonna do both. Two pigs. Same size. Same weight. Two roasts. We get a panel of impartial judges. Maybe blindfold them. But you got to do it from live pig to roast pig. May the best pig win."
I'm already cleaning up. Wiping down the counter.
446
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
"Felix." Macario hands me his empty bowl. "Did you just decide this now?"
"Hiro's dish. It works every time."
"What about my problem?"
"Sorry. You got to find your own dish."
Macario's waiting in front on Kearny with the Chevy. Another pickup behind him, and Alfred's driving that one. Butcher's crew, about half dozen guys piling in. Alfred's got two double-size Samoans in the truck. They're so big, he's driving squeezed outside the window even. Pretending to drive with one arm over the top of the wheel.
I look in the truck. "Cozy, eh."
Everybody looks at me and smiles. All they can do to turn their heads, but Alfred says, "O.K." He's always enthusiastic. "Where're we going?"
"You don't know?" I ask.
"Hey," he says, "lucky we got the truck."
Macario comes over. Consults with Alfred. "Claudio says he knows. Some place in Salinas."
"I'm following you, man."
As usual, I sit shotgun with Macario. He's looking at a paper bag with something in it on my lap. "What's that?"
"Pio."
"We're not leaving him out there, are we?"
"What? Pio's party right here in San Francisco. He's just going for the ride."
"Choose the pigs?"
"You never know."
"Right."
So we driving with the butcher's crew and Pio south to Salinas. Macario looks back in his rearview mirror and says, "What about the Samoans?"
"Alfred's buddies. He says they got the knowledge."
"What do you figure? Truck cabin must be holding seven hundred pounds."
The guys are looking back at the truck. "And that's not including Alfred."
I HOTEL
447
"Don t go too fast. Truck has to brake, it's going to flip over us." "That's why we got to get those pigs. For counterweight."
In Salinas, locate the Hamilton Farm. Family operation. Everybody gets out to negotiate. Hamilton says, "I'm not in the pig business."
"What about those pigs over there?"
"What about them?"
"Look like pigs."
"They're not pigs. Boars. Wild boars. Goddamn animals come down and tear up my crops. I shot the mother, then found this litter. Thought I'd raise them for meat."
"O.K., that's the kind we want."
Butcher's crew flanked by the Samoans all nod, then confer. "Too small. Even if we take all seven, can only feed seven."
Macario looks on. "They're not that small."
"Come back in a couple months," says Hamilton.
"How big was the mother?"
"Big. Hundred fifty pounds. Got her butchered into hams."
"That's it."
"We get big daddy."
"You want to hunt them out, be my guest. Goddamn infestation." Hamilton points. "Follow their trails into those hills over there. Plenty out there, if you can catch them."
Macario looks at me. "Hunt?" He addresses the butcher's crew. Tattered bunch of old Chinese and Filipino guys got their knives in the back of the car. Sharp and ready to go. They standing there puffed up with their arms crossed over their chests.
"We came here to get pig. We get pig."
"Save the fifty bucks. Get free ones in the wild."
"Maybe we need some preparation. When's the last time you hunt?"
The Samoans put in. "Don't worry. We gonna take care of business."
"That's right. We take care of business."
One of the old guys, Lee, says, "My cousin lives in downtown Salinas, old Chinatown. We get some lunch and get ready."
"Got to hunt around sundown. That's when the pigs come out."
Macario asks, "How long is this going to take?"
448
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
"Depends."
"Don't worry." The Samoans slap Macario on the back and hug Alfred. "We gonna take care of business."
"Right. Whatchu worry? We not born yesterday." "Hunting is an old habit." "You gonna see the real stuff." Everyone is getting excited.
It's taking three days. Daytime, guys cutting bamboo and making long spears. Digging holes and making traps. Making maps and telling stories. The one that got away. How many get away? Sleeping late, eating at Lee's, drinking beers.
During the day, I say to Macario, "I take you on a tour of Salinas. I used to live here, cooked in that big house on the corner." .
"That one?"
"Yeah, you know John Steinbeck?"
"Grapes of Wrath?"
"Yeah, that's his old house."
"Are you kidding?"
"John likes my tarts. I know he comes down to the kitchen at night. Steals the tarts. Strawberry tarts. Boysenberry. Rhubarb. One night I catch him, so I make a pot of coffee, and we get to talking. Some time I tell you about it."
We stand on the corner. House needs some painting. Garden's a mess. I shake my head. "Used to be beautiful. Wonder who owns it now? Nobody remembers."
"Rich growers in Salinas must hate Steinbeck."
"Those days, who knows he was gonna write? Who's side he's on? Just a kid like you. Going to Stanford sometimes."
"Felix, how old were you?"
"Oh, about the same as John. I was going to Berkeley, but I had to quit."
"Felix, you never told me that."
"You didn't know I was a fountain-pen boy?"
Macario's impressed.
"You know John died couple years back, 1968. You think that's ironic?
I HOTEL
449
We start the grape strike, and he dies. All the time, Pinoys, Mexicans, we were there too. We were there first, before the Okies and the Arkies. Segregated camps, but still there. Nothing changes for us."
By the third day, Lee's cousin is getting anxious. Even though I'm helping him, Samoans eating multiply two times three. And then we all chowing down too, after chasing wild boar. And nothing to show for. Chasing is an exaggeration. How fast can these guys run? Samoans run in slow motion with thunder feet. Old guys not far behind. Bunch of retired savages. I quit after the first night on the grounds I'm the cook. But then, I got to hear the stories.
"Felix, you missing everything."
"So Claudio, he's got the idea we climb into the trees, and sure enough, we can hear them grunting around, and got an entire herd of them, right there under him."
"So I come around other side, getting ready. How close am I? Really close. But then, what the fuck! Claudio comes crashing down."
"Lucky for him the branch is slow falling. Otherwise he got one broken head."
"But goddamn! Those piggies scatter, bunch of squealing rats."
Alfred says, "And I see these manongs with handmade spears going in every which direction. Incredible scene, man."
"Shiiit," Claudio shakes his head guiltily. "We lost our chance."
"What about the traps?"
"They must be working."
"What you catch?"
"Raccoon."
Finally, the game is up. Fish and Game comes around. "You guys have a hunting license?" he asks.
"See this tattoo?" one of the Samoans asks. "This is my hunting license."
"That's a nice tattoo," Fish and Game says.
Next day, Macario and Alfred do some research. Drive up to a meat processing plant just outside Salinas proper. Make the guys choose the pigs. Haggle over the weight. Pinch the price. Pigs are clean, pink. No hair. No blood. Blue PDA stamp of approval. Tuck them in ice back of the truck
450
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
and use them for counterweight. Throw in one of those decorative California banana trees never seen a banana. Throw in the bamboo spears that can double as spits. Stop for rocks. I pat Pio on the top of his box. Back of the Chevy, the butcher's crew's got their heads tossed in crooked directions. Everybody snoring.
Back at the I-Hotel, roasting crews are getting anxious. "Shit. We think you never coming back. Run off with fifty bucks and get drunk."
"We did that too."
"Hey, man," Alfred says. "We went hunting."
Crew examines the pigs. "Hunting for a butcher shop?"
"It's a long story."
Roasting crews haul off their respective pigs to separate kitchens. Something going on about the basting sauces. It's all top secret.
I can't be involved. I carry Pio upstairs and put him on my chair. I can't remember when I fall into my bed.
It doesn't matter because it seems like it's five minutes, and someone pounding on my door. "Felix! Wake up!" It's Alfred. "Guys said I got to bring you over to the site. You got to supervise, you know, the imu."
"What time is it?"
"Three a.m."
"Go away."
"Pit's dug. I got a shitload of wood back of the truck."
I remember Pio on the chair. "Goddamn," I say. "Who's idea was this?" I never take off my clothes anyway. Roll off the bed. "Come on," I say to Pio. "Let's go."
Outside, it's night. Street's dead. Usual Barbary Coast neons. In the truck, I ask Alfred, "Where's the pit?"
"We found the perfect location."
"Golden Gate Park?" I speculate.
"Couldn't get a permit for a fire there." Alfred shakes his head. "First, we thought about an open lot in the Western Addition, but it's not clandestine enough." He pulls the truck up under the hacked-off end of the Embarcadero Freeway. "This," he points into the dark freeway underbelly, "is public no-man's land. Hoboville. Skidrow guys always warming
I HOTEL	451
up around cans of burning material. Who's gonna notice one more fire?" Out of the dark, the imu roasting crew emerges and runs off with all the wood on the truck. They got the rocks in the pit and the wood stacked up like a Boy Scout teepee. Pour a gallon of lighter fluid all over everything. "Watch out! Stand back!" Match gets tossed in and whooomp! That's no hobo fire. Smoke is curling around the concrete ceiling, mixing in with the fog. Except for the smell, could be fog. Joining the cat feet.
Everybody standing around that pit with their eyes on fire.
How many hours later, you got perfect oven conditions? Someone takes a machete to the banana tree. Lines the pit. Sets the hot rocks inside the pig carcass.
"Wait," I say. I run to the truck and open up Pio's box. Dip my hand into his ashes and grab a handful. Run back.
"What's that?"
"Special pepper and herb seasoning," I say. "Trust me." I sprinkle it into the carcass with the rocks.
"Is this cheating?" Someone asks.
"No way," I say. "I do the same for the spitters."
Wrap up the pig in leaves and wire and set it into the imu. Bury everything. By then, the sun's up, but crew's buried too, inside their sleeping bags around the imu. Ready to catch some zs.
But that's when the spit crew arrives.
"Hey, where you figure they buried their pig?"
"Can't you tell? Over there." Points to the sleeping bags. "They circling it like covered wagons."
They kick the guys in the sleeping bags and open their beers. "Hey," they yell. "Surf's up!"
Some in the bags roll over, but others get up and like to punch the daylights out for some nightlight.
"O.K. O.K. Calm down. Go back to bed."
Spit operation is simple. Pretty much cement blocks and two empty quart-sized cans. Dent the cans to make two rests for the bamboo spit. Pull the spit through the pig. Get your coals white hot. Prop the spit up on the cans on the blocks and turn. Keep turning and turning.
452
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
For my part, spit pig gets the same pepper and herb treatment. I slap my hands together, and Pio flies around the pig like pixie dust.
Macario arrives around ten a.m. He smells the air and says, "I've seen it on the way. The Tenderloin is emptying out, and every hobo is walking in this direction."
Band arrives. Guitars, ukuleles, banjos, violins, flutes, accordions, and drums. Once they get going, they never stop for nothing. One guy can leave to eat, but someone always replaces him. And Frankie's already managed to find a girl to dance with.
The ACC is busy pulling a banner over the side of the freeway. Says: Celebrate the Rise of the I-Hotel!
"Where's it rising?" I ask.
"Don't you get it? Like a phoenix from the ashes."
Not to be outdone, the CPA pulls another banner over the other side of the freeway. Liberate the Holiday Inn for Low-Income Housing! Long Live the I-Hotel!
I see Abra. She makes these blue ribbon pins for the three impartial judges and pins the damn badges on them like this is going to be their finest moment. It says: Save the I-Hotel Roast Pig Judge. Got to be some kind of joke. She winks at me.
Meanwhile, Julio comes by with a wad of cash and a notebook. "Pit or spit?" he offers. "You might as well put in the pool like everyone else."
"What are the odds?"
"No odds. How we gonna know a thing like that? Split up the winnings with the winners." He nudges me. "Come on Felix, your opinion counts. If someone knows it, it might help one side of the pot. Your opinion might be the odds."
"Are you kidding?" I wave him away. "What I got to do with that kind of trouble?"
Now that they got the badges of courage, I can see the judges are in trouble. Everybody going up to them and toasting them like the grooms in some wedding. "Hey, Jack," someone says. "Here's to pit cooking!"
"Jack," someone else says, "You drink to pit, you got to drink to spit."
"Fair is fair." Another toast.
I HOTEL
453
"Hey, Ken! Looks like you need a drink, warm up those taste buds."
By the time Ken is looking very happy, Julio even tries to get him to join the pool.
"Julio," I say. "Ken's a judge. He can't be in the pool. It's a conflict of interest."
"What's the conflict? Either he wins or loses, depending."
"That's right," Ken agrees. "Depending."
I shake my head. Ken is a student at Boalt Hall, knows how to argue all the sides. So I can already tell he's never gonna be a real judge. Real judge's got to go with blind truth, not various possible truths. "Hey," I pull Ken over, "you wanna hear some stories about this guy?" I point to Julio. "How many years he makes it as a bookie?"
"I always come through for you, Felix." Julio gives me his smile.
"I met you first time over at La Plantera," I say.
"Oh yeah. Benny was the bartender. Kept that bar polished like he owned it."
"He did."
"Downstairs was where the action was. Gambling twenty-four hours."
"Max Duling was always there. Remember?"
"Card hustler," I explain to Ken.
Julio expands. Points to his eyes. "Max Duling was cross-eyed. You looking at his eyes, you don't know where he's looking, but his hands were moving fast."
"You remember the red light?"
"Upstairs, Benny had a button on the bar. If the cops come, he pushes it. Downstairs we quick put away our money and the cards. When the cops come down, all they find is a bunch of men watching boxing movies on an old projector."
"That's how come I met you."
"That's right. I took your bet on the Bolo Puncher that very night. The movie convinced you. You see?" He nods to Ken. "I make him a killing."
I say to Ken as I point to Julio laughing, "Don't trust him."
Suddenly, there's a commotion. Looks like the bamboo spit is on fire. Guys running around frantically trying to save the pig. Running with the
454
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
spit and the two-hundred-pound pig this way and that. Red cinders flying everywhere. I see it before it happens. Cinders rain on the sleeping bags, and a couple catch fire. So now we got a pig and two sleeping bags on fire. We pull the kids out of the bags. Everybody's yelling.
"Water. Where's the water?"
"How come we got a fire going and no water?"
"Try beer!"
"Try your fucking pee!"
Someone thinks they can take another sleeping bag and snuff out the pig fire, but now it's on fire too. Fire's flying up.
The phoenix from the ashes banner catches fire and flies off into the street. I see the kids running around the street stomping out the new pieces of fire.
Now you can hear the sirens coming our way. When the fire truck gets here, the fire fighters run out. They're all decked out in their heaviest uniforms, ready for a conflagration. A tribute to Coit Tower. They laugh, but the spit crew is yelling. "Save our pig! Save our pig!" So they hose it down.
I go over to examine the pig. Steam is coming up all around. You would think it would be soggy, but actually the steam helps.
The spit crew is hovering over their pig, holding their hearts like they the fathers at the end of a long, tough labor. Claudio hands me a knife, and I make a critical incision. I announce like the doctor on the scene, "Skin is still crispy. Maybe this is an improvement. You got the effect of the imu without the imu."
"It's done!" someone yells.
"We did it!" The spit crew is dancing around like the fire was their idea.
Somebody in the back says, "I think Felix is saying it's edible."
Meanwhile Team Pit is unearthing their baby. They pull back the banana leaves, and already I know. The bones have collapsed inside the meat. It's that tender. Hard to say it has the look of a pig. Even the head has disintegrated. As a chef, I'd say poor presentation, but what the heck. "Very tender," I say.
I get up, and everyone is dancing around me. The firefighters are eating. The Samoans are eating. The judges are too drunk to eat. For some
I HOTEL
455
reason the band never stops playing. Like it's the Titanic.The musicians just back away from the fire and keep playing. Play through the whole goddamn fiasco. Jubilant fiasco. I see Frankie over there dancing with Abra. Abra's twins dancing too. Alfred dancing with Macario.
I watch the pork roast slip into hungry mouths. See the happy crunch of the burnt skin and the flaked feathers of meat slip away. Shiny grease coating every lip. Pio's magic making them remember. Remember every goddamn song they ever heard or sang in their lives. And they will sing and sing and sing until the night falls and the fog creeps back under the Embarcadero.
456
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
4: Empty Soup
This particular year Abra's twins are maybe five years old. After you get to be my age, you start counting again. My case, it's Abra's twins keeping count. Year number five and we still sitting tight in the I-Hotel. Boy is Emilio. Girl is Andrea. For Abra, it's all about history: Emilio Aguinaldo and Andres Bonifacio. I call them Emil and Andie. It's a twin life. Those two are never apart. Stuck together like some kind of glue. Got to do everything together. Get everything equal. Wake, eat, play, sleep together. Sometimes they're hugging. Sometimes they're fighting. You see them rolling around in the corridor like cat and dog. I yell, "Andie! Emil! I got something for you."
And just like the revolutionary generals they are, they get up to attention and run down to me. By now, they know I got some treat for them. This is proof that the cook is the most powerful personage in the nation.
Abra says, "You've got to stop it, Felix. They think they can get rewarded for fighting."
"After five years of life, they pretty damn smart. Who gets reward for being good?"
"Seriously, Felix."
"Look," I say. "They fight because they're hungry. Maybe starving. Get it? Remember what Imelda said. 'Let them eat cake.'"
"Felix, I don't think it was her who said it."
"Trust me. I'm there when she says it."
"Serving her cake in the Malacanang I suppose."
"Chocolate cheesecake. My recipe, but now the infamous Imelda cake."
"That's not your recipe. That's my mom's."
"But where did your mom get it?"
"Ladies Home Journal, I bet."
"That's right! How long your mother reads the Journal?"
"How should I know? She was a Filipino war bride."
"I been reading it since Jane Addams was a columnist."
"You are so full of shit."
I HOTEL
457