2: Halo-Halo
"Manong." The kid jumps out. "Take my seat in front." He holds the door open for me. When I get treated like this? I got to take advantage. Macario turns to me from his driver's seat. "Gonna ride shotgun?"
"Why not? I'm the only one can shoot a gun."
"Don't be so sure."
I look at Macario, but don't say nothing. Kids think they preparing for the revolution. O.K., prepare, but I been here before. In fact, in this Chevy wagon chasing the heat up 1-5. History is repeating itself. But this is a different Macario.
"What's it been?" I ask. "Maybe I know you now five years?"
"Remember? I came down to Delano in a caravan with Pete Velasco. We brought a load of provisions for the strike."
"Ha! Velasco's Fiasco." I laugh. "How many times that truck broke down?"
"Met you at Filipino Hall. You were in the kitchen."
"Adding water to the soup. How long I'm waiting for provisions? Depend on you guys, we gonna starve."
"You always had food from that beautiful garden."
"I'm talking rice. Meat."
"Pete managed to keep some big fish on ice."
"How much ice left? Nothing but water when you arrive. Ha! I remember now. You struggling in with the cooler full of water." I demonstrate him stumbling in. "I open the cooler up and pull the fish out. Leave you there with a hundred pounds of sloshing water." I slap my knees. "Ha ha!"
"Shit, I got all wet."
"Stinking fish water."
"But that fish you made was good."
"Bulonglong style. I got the recipe from Johnny Bulonglong himself. You too young to remember. Used to be Ilocano owned the Golden Gate, across from the hotel."
"Felix, I got a favor to ask."
434
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
"What's that?"
"Don't talk about food yet. We just got in the car."
"Don't worry. I fill this car up with the aroma of food. You don't need to stop to eat never."
Everyone's groaning in the backseat.
"O.K. O.K." I'm quiet for a long time. But what we gonna talk about? I think about Macario, just a curious college kid come to check us out. That was back in 1968. That year we getting national attention for the grape boycott. Then Cesar stops eating. He's going to fast like Mahatma K. Gandhi. Suddenly Delano looks like India. Farmworkers like Indian people under the imperial thumb of the Great Encyclopedia Britannica. That's the stuff. The media eats it up.
"Did you come to Delano before or after RFK?" I ask.
"After. He was already dead. Assassinated in L.A."
"Robert and Ethel try my soup. Thin soup with handmade bread. That's how Cesar breaks his fast."
"Felix."
"Thin vegetable soup. Cesar is vegetarian."
"I don't believe it."
"What? I no lie. Strict vegetarian. No dairy even. Guy like that."
"How come we talking food again?"
"What's the problem? You not vegetarian."
Grumbling.
I change the subject. After all, I'm a peaceful guy. Just like Cesar. "That's not the first time you come to Delano. Hey," I remember, "next year you come with Ben San Pablo."
"Ben came with me to get Cesar's endorsement for the strike at Berkeley."
"Oh yeah, you students striking too. What was that about?"
"To get a Third World college."
"You get your college?"
"No. That's when I quit to work in the community."
I nod. I meet them all. Macario, Ben, Abra, Olivia, Ria. Kids are looking for something they can't find. Hotel's a magnet for them. Like Sixto's garden. Digging and sweating. I say, "That time in Delano you work in the Pink House and stay at Philip Vera Cruz's place in Richgrove."
"Phil talks with Ben and me all night, every night."
I HOTEL
435
"I know the talk," I say. "Phil can get into it. Smart kids like you and Ben."
"Some nights I think you were there, too?" He's asking.
"What time I got for philosophy? You forget I'm the cook. Got to get up around three a.m. Fix grub by four a.m. for the first contingent of pickets. Besides, Phil got that goddamn dog Aguinaldo, never stops barking. All night. Barking. Barking. Who can get any sleep?" I slap Macario's knee. "That's why you have to talk all night."
"Ben and Phil did all the talking. Mostly I listened."
I think, that's Macario. Always listening. That's his talent.
"Those were the nights."
Maybe Ben's the brainy one. Thinks and writes what he thinks. Phil's like that too. But me, I got to cook. Otherwise I can't think. Maybe Macario's got to cook too. Could be. I say, "Now you and Ben got to practice what you talk. Like I say, 'proof of the pudding.'"
Macario remembers, "Then we got a call. Had to rush back to the hotel because of the fire."
"That's right. I knew Pio Rosete, one of the guys who died in the fire. What you think? To this day, I know it was arson."
"Too much of a coincidence. Fire's the night before Solomon's supposed to sign a new lease agreement. Next day, he won't sign."
Yeah, I make a quick decision and take the ride back with the kids. Phil comes too, but he's already promised. He's going to teach a class at Berkeley. Make some speeches for the UFW. I'm just thinking it's time to see my old home before it burns down completely. I go to San Francisco, check into the I-Hotel just like old times, and for a while, I never leave. I get a room on the second floor. Not the burnt end. On that side, it's all charred black. Whole place smells like smoke. Somebody thinks they saw Pio's ghost. Maybe it's just soot rising. Solomon says the place is a fire-trap. Gives us three months to vacate.
About a month later, it's April 18 at 5:12 in the foggy morning, middle of Union Square. What are we doing at this goddamn hour? Mayor Alioto is about to start his Earthquake Party, sixty-three years after the great 1906 San Francisco earthquake. How many thousand San Franciscans there to feel the kick-off? This is one crazy city.
But suddenly, there's Macario and how many others rushing the podium. They pull out their banners: Save the I-Hotel! Fight the Eviction
436
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
of Elderly Tenants! Shame on you, Simon Solomon!
At precisely 5:12 a.m. Macario speaks: Mayor Alioto and the people of San Francisco. The Great Earthquake destroyed our city. It destroyed all of Chinatown, but we Asian Americans labored to rebuild this great city. Now another kind of earthquake seeks again to destroy our communities and to replace our homes and neighborhoods with financial buildings and parking lots for the rich...
That's the mayor's Earthquake Party.
I admit. I'm surprised. Life takes that kind of turn. A clumsy kid who just listens suddenly gets some guts. Spits out the cork in his throat. Maybe Phil's thunder in his chest makes its way out.
"Tell me the truth." I say to Macario. "What you come to Delano for? Searching for something?"
"What do you mean?"
"First time, didn't you have a girlfriend? What happened?"
"Didn't work out."
"She was a nice girl. Smart, too."
"Hmm."
"What was her name? I forget her name."
"So did I."
"You forget her name? I never forget my girlfriend's name."
"O.K., Felix. You can talk about food again."
"Food and women. It's all the same thing."
Back in the day, I know Lucy. Of course, Lucy is not the only one. I know Nancy, Mabel, Dorothy, Betty, Doris, Lilly, Marilyn, Greta. I got them waiting in every town up and down the Pacific coast. You ask anybody who knows. Anywhere there's dancing, I got my special partner waiting. I buy up all her tickets for the evening, and we make the floor our floor and the night our night.
Old Frankie and I, we reminisce about the old days. I say, "You remember Lucy?"
"Oh yeah," he smiles big.
"She was my girl."
"Nah, Felix, I got to be honest with you after all these years. She was my girl."
I HOTEL
437
"Frankie, I'm talking about Lucy Lightning over at Danceland. I could drive in from Delano or maybe Coachella on the weekend, and she would be waiting. Every other fellow had to fall away."
"That's Lucy. You come in on Saturdays as usual."
"As usual."
"So you warm her up. I come in on Sundays."
"Listen. After we finish on Saturdays, she got to get new shoes. She got to observe Sunday as a day of rest."
"I tell you, Felix. You just make the floor smooth for me."
"When I arrive, the crowd on that dance floor parts for me, and Lucy is right there walking to me with her open arms."
"On Sunday, I meet Lucy at Pershing Square, and we stroll around. I buy her ice cream at the soda fountain, then we make our entrance at Danceland."
Now I know Frankie's lying. Mostly because he's still alive and he's still wearing the same suit without evidence of ever being roughed up, or better yet, shot. How many fights I get in to keep company with Lucy? Those days, a Pinoy walk down the street with a white woman has to be ready with some bravado. Maybe Frankie had himself a pistol. Oh yeah. I can believe it. But the ice cream soda fountain thing, no way. I romanced my Lucy with halo-halo.
I take my time with Frankie. Explain about the halo-halo. Give him the benefit of the doubt. After all, Frankie's been around the block more than once. Course these days, all we doing is circling it. He's got his stories. I got mine.
O.K., most tropical fruits not available at the time. But I don't go with no can of fruit cocktail. Substitute succulent peaches for mangoes. Peeled grapes for macapuna. I make the sweet beans and corn myself. Maybe banana. A dollop of tapioca. Squares of lime Jell-O. Shaved ice. Make it rich with thick sweet cream. Top it off with a maraschino cherry. You make it to the bottom of the parfait glass, could be a surprise of rum or brandy.
Frankie says, "Felix, we talking women or food? Lucy or halo-halo?"
"All the same thing. When I think about those dancing days, I think halo-halo."
Frankie shakes his head. "You come up to my room. I show you something."
438
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I follow Frankie upstairs. His room's same like mine, just down the hall. Narrow two-by-four gets you room for a single bed, chest of drawers, standing closet, little sink. You get your window overlooking Jackson or Kearny or maybe the alley on the backside. We paying fifty dollars a month. What you expect?
Frankie takes off his jacket and adjusts it on a hanger behind his door. Then he sets his hat on a hook up on the wall. He rolls up his sleeves and pulls out a small suitcase from under the bed. I sit in the chair. Frankie sits on the bed. Suitcase is filled with envelopes and postcards with foreign stamps.
"Love letters?" I ask.
"Look how many," he says. "I got another suitcase filled."
He fingers through the old papers, some of them going yellow. Pretty soon I see what he's looking for, but his eyes are bad. He misses it and gets down to pull up the second suitcase. While he's busy going through that one, I pick up some postcards and read them. "Francisco," I read. "Since when you called Francisco?"
He takes a close look. "See, this one signed Maria Carmen." He points to the picture on the other side. "Rio de Janeiro. Sugar Loaf."
"What's this say?" I ask.
"She writes to me in Portuguese. 'Beijos,'" he reads. "Means, you know." He smiles and puckers up. He closes his eyes like he's remembering. But then he says, "But that's not the one." He throws the card back into the pile and continues to rifle through another stack.
When he's not looking, I tug out the envelope that has the return address on Temple Street in Los Angeles. You can't mistake the letters, L. L., in curlicues. I slip the envelope into my jacket.
I pick up another postcard. "You go to Macao? I was there too." I pick through the stacks. There're cards and envelopes from every port city in the world. Nagasaki. Hong Kong. Singapore. Madras. Karachi. Cape Town. Lisbon. New York. Montevideo. Lima. Honolulu. Brisbane. To name a few. Talk about circumnavigation.
I stick around a bit more while Frankie gets lost in his love letters. Spread out all over his bed. Pretty soon I think he forgets why he invited me up. He's reading them one by one like it was yesterday. I make my quiet exit with Lucy Lightning. I don't know why I take Frankie's letter.
I HOTEL
439
Can't be much to it. Lucy don't have much education. Poor Okie girl rides in on a jalopy out of the Dust Bowl. Guys like Frankie spend their days washing dishes and busing tables on the ocean, got a girl in every port and nothing left but two suitcases of correspondence to prove it. I don't know why.
Macario nudges me. I'm back in the car. "You asleep?"
"No."
"What you thinking about?"
"Halo-halo."
"Figures."
"Halo-halo is like a performance. Like theater. Everything goes in stages with lots of color: red, green, orange, white, purple. Then texture: smooth, crunchy, slippery. Then character: sweet, sour, nutty, cold. You think: funny, romantic, nostalgic. When it's over, you bite your frozen tongue. Draw blood. Tragic."
"Goddamn, Felix. Where we gonna get halo-halo on the 1-5?"
I tap my head. "Only in your mind."
"Man, you drive me nuts."
"You know, I think Cesar's right. If you gonna ask the whole world to quit grapes, you can go the whole way and eat nothing."
"Was that the point?"
"Back in the sixties, guys like you starving to be too skinny for the draft. Then others eating, eating, to be too fat. Some guys guzzle one quart of soy sauce to get high blood pressure. Eating, not eating, you put your life on the line. That's the recipe for revolution."
Macario lights up. "Maybe that's what we'll propose. Someone go on a hunger strike for the I-Hotel." He's nodding like it's his idea. "You volunteering?"
"No way!"
Someone in the back wakes up. "Shit. Didn't you say Cesar's vegetarian? Easy for him to cut out one more food group."
"O.K., we start slowly. One food group at a time."
Now the argument starts.
"This is when my cultural nationalism kicks in. Comes to food, I am Pilipino."
440
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I'm staring out the Chevy surrounded by agribusiness on either side of the 1-5. Maybe it looks like desert and sage, but they own it. They just need some water.
You think about it. Food is the basis for everything. Without food, it's all over. Kaput. They don't lie when they say you are what you eat. If you can't get nothing to eat, you are nothing. Nothing. They also don't lie when they say you eat to live. And you live to eat. What's someone's culture but the way he eats? Everybody living from meal to meal, even if it takes somebody three days to get to the next one. Call that the culture of poverty. Maybe you a nomad or you tied to the land. It's how you get your food. It's how you organize to get your food. Keep your food. Keep your food for yourself. Who grows it? Cultivates it? Sells it? Cooks it? Who gets fed and does not get fed? Who throws it away? Who eats the leftovers?
What's the story of the world? How come Magellan comes to bother folks like us in faraway islands? It's to make their food taste better. Once you taste a secret, you go running after your tongue. It can't be helped. Once you know this principle of the world, then everything becomes clear. You take Marx. You take Freud. You take Einstein. You take Suzuki. The politics of food. The sex of food. The relativity of food. The Zen of food.
I tell these radical kids, eventually all the answers can be found in food. Are they listening? Follow the food, I say. You born in the city. You forget your connection to the earth. And I don't mean just Watsonville or Delano. That's what guys like me have, the knowledge. We never stop. Everywhere we go, we touch the food right at the source. We digging the earth, sowing the seed. We pulling the weeds. Then cutting cane or slicing pineapple. Shucking lettuce or cutting asparagus. Dirt under the nails, under the blisters, in the grooves of our hands. It never washes out.
Then harvesting grapes. When grapes are ready, there's nothing more beautiful and luxurious. I don't say this like I'm the grower. I say this because who cannot appreciate the miracle of planted food comes back every year with your encouragement? These grapes are my grapes, my children. The small, sour, purple ones crushed for Gallo wine. Large, green, seedless Thompson for Dole fruit cocktail. The reds for Sun-Maid raisins. But that's just the earth.
What about the sea? Pulling in the live salmon. You see the great silver bodies kick out from the surf like wild mustang. We slit the soft bel-
I HOTEL
441
lies and pull out the eggs. Red orange, slimy grape clusters shudder in your hands. You holding salmon caviar in one hand and the caviar that makes the wine in the other. Holding it tender like babies because this stuff will travel to the mans table. Who's gonna put it there? I'm gonna put it there. Set the caviar on thin crackers with lime zest. Pour a chilled bottle of sparkling wine. Make him look gracious in a room full of beautiful women, tinkling glasses, fluttering candles, and chandeliers. I'm holding my hands out with the open palms of sea and land caviar. Holding them out like offering. Then take it away. Close the fists and squeeze. Squeeze hard.
442
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
One day Macario comes by my room. He's holding a small cardboard box. He says, "Look what I found back of the closet in Joe's office."
I scrutinize the label on the box. "Crematorium," I make out. Then "Pio Rosete."
Macario pulls open the cover. Inside, there's a plastic sack of gray ashes.
"It's Pio," I say. "What's he doing here?"
"Maybe nobody claimed him. No next of kin."
"How long it's been since the fire?"
"Awhile."
I scratch my head. "That's what the guys say."
"What?"
"Pio's ghost coming around bothering them. Sometimes he's got his banjo. Other times, maybe you playing rummy, and you lose your card. You find it somewhere else you never expect."
"Guys are cheating."
"That's what they're saying. Pio was a good cheater."
"You believe it?"
"If you get him on your side, maybe you could win."
Macario chuckles, but then he looks at the box and gets serious again. "So now what?"
"Maybe he knows who set the fire. We never think to ask him."
"Look," Macario says. "You figure this out. You knew him." He hands me the box and walks away.
I put Pio down in the chair and sit in my room. Now I get these ashes for a roommate. "Pio," I say. "You remember that song? How does it go?" I hum a few verses. Pretty soon I remember the whole song and sing everything. I think, did he get burned up with his banjo? Probably. Nothing left of his old room. I think, that's Pio all right. How else could I remember the whole song?
I HOTEL
443