1: Arthur Hama—Liberty
This year, 1974, November marks an historic summit in Vladivostok. Students of the Cold War will recognize that it is only two years since the signing of the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty in Moscow, and that negotiations for the SALT II or Strategic Arms Limitation Talks also continue. Two leaders of the great superpowers, the general secretary of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Leonid Brezhnev, and the American president of the United States, Gerald Ford, meet to agree to limit the nuclear arsenals of their respective countries. It is agreed that each side will have no more than 2,400 strategic launchers and strategic bombers, and that only 1,320 of these may have multiple warheads. They also reach an accord to prohibit any underground testing of nuclear weapons exceeding 150 kilotons and to share data from any future testing. These agreements are in the continuing international spirit of detente and the efforts to dismantle the nuclear arsenals that support what would be the ultimate catastrophe of Mutually Assured Destruction.
I HOTEL
493
Far from Vladivostok, in what could be a sister city, San Francisco, a daughter of Russian emigres in America peels open a tissue-thin envelope pasted with Japanese stamps. She looks up from the precise handwriting in the enclosed letter and announces to her son, "Art is dead."
"Yeah, God, but art? Never thought I'd hear you say that."
"No, I mean your father, Arthur. He's died."
Sen Hama carries the heavy wheelchair to the top of the stairs. His brother, Harry, follows behind on crutches, climbing each step with jutting but determined movements. Estelle Hama, their mother, waits at the top of the stairs. She is a well-groomed woman whose stark white hair radiates in a halo around her head. She's holding a small bouquet of homegrown roses.
Reaching behind and majestically into the blue sky and this extraordinarily clear San Francisco day is the concrete structure of Coit Tower, rising 210 feet over Telegraph Hill. Coit Tower is built to honor the firemen who saved the City of San Francisco from the fires after the Great Earthquake of 1906. Designed in 1933 in the style of art deco, the Works Project Administration invites twenty-six artists to paint the interior frescoes. Defaced and defamed in the 1950s, the tower is closed to the public for seventeen years. A caretaker opens the tower to the Hama family for a private viewing.
Estelle watches her sons struggle with their separate burdens, but she does not move to help. Her eyes are rendered with a glow of pride and resolve. Sen arrives at the top and waits with the wheelchair at his mother's side. When Harry finally huffs awkwardly to the top, Sen taunts his brother with a grin, "I beat you again."
Harry replies, handing his brother the crutches, "You had a head start." He turns his spindly legs and plops into the leather sling of the wheelchair. "One of these days, they'll put a ramp up, and I'll get a motorized chair, and then I'll beat your ass." He twists a glance back at Sen.
Sen cuffs him lightly over the ear and pushes the chair forward. "Harry, you're so full of shit."
Estelle walks resolutely ahead, followed by her sons, Sen pushing Harry in his wheelchair. They turn into the circular confines of the tower's first floor, their eyes adjusting to the somber light, slowly following the
494
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
Industry of the American people of San Francisco, California. The morning light, cast in filtered angles through narrow, recessed windows, illuminates frescoed images of powerful working people. The people working in factories, on farmlands, on railroads, and in shipyards. Hardworking people building America. Their strong muscular bodies and their faces, every one set with grim determination, pose for eternity in vivid earth colors across the curving corridor.
Estelle pauses before a library scene, ascending tiers of men reading the current headlines of artistic disputes and domestic turmoil. A man in the foreground reaches for a copy of Karl Marx's Das Kapital. "Bernard Zakheim," Estelle announces the name of the artist.
"Must have gotten in trouble for that." Harry points at Marx from his chair.
"Well, at least they didn't paint over it," says Sen.
Estelle remembers, "Someone painted a hammer and sickle. Maybe on one of the beams." She looks up. "I think they had to remove that, unless you spot it somewhere. Oh," she remembers, "someone wrote, Workers of the World Unite. Now that was definitely expunged. "Estelle moves across the corridor to the murals on the opposite wall. "I assisted on this mural here. Punched and set up the tracing. Prepped the paint. Kept the sponges wet, the brushes ready. Another guy prepped all the plaster. It had to be done in swatches. Like this area. See the gun? The holdup? The artist has to work fast on fresh plaster, and you can't make any mistakes. He's got to finish an area by the end of the day. That's why it's called fresco, for fresh. I was a student of Victor Arnautoff, who painted this city scene. This is Arnautoff himself here." She points to the artist's self-portrait next to the newspaper stand with the Daily Worker.
Sen pulls Harry in his chair back to get the big picture, then wheels him forward to see the details.
Estelle continues, "This is the street scene outside the Monkey Building where Art and I lived. All the artists lived there. Diego Rivera lived there while he painted the art school mural and the Stock Exchange. Your father and most of these other artists here all worked with Diego. Some even went down to Mexico. That's how they got their commissions in this tower."
"Monkey Building?" Harry laughs.
I HOTEL
495
Estelle's memory wanders back. "Art shared a studio there with a Chinese painter. I forget his name. I think it was Lin. Lin had just come back from Paris, definitely a fellow traveler, someone who knew people like Chou En-lai."
"What year is this?" asks Sen.
"The Depression—1933?" she asks herself, then asserts, "1934."
The young men nod, but they have no real idea about this time period before they were born and when Arthur Hama worked as a painter and a political organizer for the Communist Party and later as a longshoreman.
Estelle reaches back. "I met Art in New York at the John Reed Club. They had just formed. He was a protege of the artist Kuniyoshi. I knew Kuniyoshi. Well, everyone knew Yasuo in those days. They were friends: Isamu Noguchi, Hideo Noda, and Eitaro Ishigaki. When Art left for San Francisco, I followed him, but I didn't want him to think I was following him. My excuse was I was studying with Arnautoff. But when he turned up in jail on a vag charge, I was there with the bail money."
"Vag?" asks Harry.
"Vagrancy. In those days, they used it as an excuse to arrest protestors."
"Guess nothing's changed."
Estelle continues, "When Art wasn't painting, he was working for a Japanese newspaper, the Rodo Shimbun."
"Communist?"
"Yes, of course. The paper supported the longshoremen and the strike. Look over here." Estelle searches around for another corner, then points to a wall of stalwartly defiant marching men. "There it is, the 1934 General Strike. By July, all the unions up and down the coast joined the longshoremen. Everything closed down. It was going on right as these murals were being painted. Just as we were finishing, everything heated up. I was running between the ILD offices and the Hall of Justice with copies of the Bill of Rights and, imagine this," she pauses in her own amazement, "thousands of dollars of bail money in my purse."
"ILD?"
"Labor Defense. We collected funds, posted bail, went to court, defended prisoners. In those days, every day I pulled folks out of jail. They'll always try to demoralize a movement by framing and arresting people. So you've got to create a positive defense to keep up the momentum."
496
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
Estelle steps into the past and grabs Arthur Hama by the arm to keep him from falling. Blood encrusts his head, his left eye is swelled shut, and a purple bruise runs across the left side of his face. He turns a twisted look at Estelle and says, "So, it is you."
"Come on. We've got to get you to a doctor."
Arthur limps forward. "I still got one eye, and they didn't break my fingers."
She pulls her fingers through his. "Still got paint all over them."
"It's not blood?"
"What's the difference?"
Estelle continues to tell Arthur's story to her sons. "We called it Bloody Thursday. The ship owners hired scabs, and the police deputized vigilantes. They beat up and arrested everyone. Threw gas bombs and fired live ammunition. Someone dubbed the city 'San Fascisto.' Two workers were killed." Estelle is quiet for a moment, remembering one of the men killed, a fellow Communist whose body she is asked to identify. She continues, "The Red Squad targeted Art because the day before he'd cut down a cop twice his size to save a comrade, and got away."
"Jujitsu," smiles Harry, slashing the air with karate chops from his chair.
"But this time, they really beat him up. He was a bloody mess."
"How many guys you save with bail money?" Sen queries his mother.
"Oh, there were lots."
Estelle hears Arthur's parched voice again. "You know what the jailer said when he let me out?" He looks woozy, as if he will pass out.
"Hang on," she says. "I'm calling a taxi."
He grips her arm for a moment and manages to say, "Jailer said, 'Your Red Angel's come for you.' That you?"
Estelle stares hard into the mural, at the only black man represented in these frescos, standing solidly with fellow workers.
Sen nudges Estelle. "But out of all of these guys you bailed out, you married the Japanese guy?"
"We couldn't get married, you know that."
"Our father was a Japanese Bolshevik troublemaker consorting with a white woman."
Estelle smiles. "That's right. I'm a hakujin."
"A Communist with loose morals."
I HOTEL
497
"My morals were never loose."
Harry sighs, and Sen rolls his eyes, but they follow her obediently from mural to mural. Estelle disappears outside momentarily with a glass cup procured from her purse. Sen watches her from the entrance pumping water from the brass fountain into the cup. She returns with the cup, moving through the anteroom before the elevator. Here she points out the map and the birds. "Otis Oldfield," she identifies the artist. "Both Art and Lin studied with him."
She heads through a door and up a stairwell. Sen parks Harry in the wheelchair before the stairs and follows her up. He turns back to Harry, asking, "You coming?"
Harry shrugs, grips the handles on the chair, then the wall and doorway and banister, and makes his slow, tortured way up the stairs. He follows the San Franciscans of the 1930s who are painted into the walls who also climb the stairwell with the cable cars.
Estelle pauses at the curved top of the stairs and points to a figure with black hair. "That's Art," she says. Then she turns and points to a figure of a woman with a golf club in the mural across. "And that's me."
"Mom's just like you, Harry," jokes Sen. "Full of stories."
Harry struggles to get within viewing range. He scrutinizes the faces. "Could be Mom before her hair turned white."
Estelle places the glass of water at the corner base of one mural and arranges her small bouquet of roses. It's a flurry of yellow, orange, and red flowers to match the earth tones of the mural above. "This is it."
Sen and Harry see the mural for the first time. "How come you never showed us this before?"
"The tower was closed so long, and . . ." Estelle is silent. She remembers that she writes to Arthur in Japan, asking if he didn't want to see his sons again. He writes back a short but very vague excuse: he's traveling. In anger, she tells everyone that Arthur has died, and by the time she tells her sons, almost as if in passing, she too believes the lie.
The family trio steps back, scanning the accomplishment of the mostly unknown artist who worked in the collectivity of this project. Only they know that the artist is a father and a husband. Their eyes move intently with the figures of the painting—golfing, hurdling, on horseback chasing a polo ball. At the ceiling, a large sun casts brilliance over the bur-
498
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
nished red tint, zigzagging with the prance of horses, across the flesh of athletes, and drawn finally to the red skirt of the female golfer.
Sen thinks aloud, "Seems like the Communists are all downstairs."
"The theme up here was sports and family life," defends Estelle. "We don't just work, you know."
"Really?"
"How old was he when he painted this?"
"Maybe Harry's age. Twenty-five. I was only twenty."
They are quiet in concentration for a long time. They scan the figures and the brushstrokes for memory and for knowledge. They try to recapture the moment of the painter painting. He is a young, aspiring, and Estelle reminds them, starving Japanese artist in America, painting a scene for public works.
Arthur Hama looks over his shoulder from his scaffold and notices a young and very pretty Estelle watching him. She says, "You're missing jujitsu there."
"This is an American scene."
"You're American."
"Born here, bred there."
"How about it? Take me to the study group tonight? I need to brush up on my dialectical materialism."
"Can't. I got another meeting."
"What's that?"
"Japanese Workers' Association."
"How about tomorrow night?"
"Tomorrow's the Nisei Democratic Artists and Writers League."
"Are you playing hard to get?"
He turns back to his painting but changes the subject. "You're Russian, aren't you?"
"My parents were from Vladivostok."
"Do they know you're hanging out with an Oriental?"
"Hey, I could be part Chinese or something, coming from Vladivostok and all."
Art looks over at Estelle, pretends to size her up, but says, "My favorite writers are all Russian."
"Well, that's a start."
I HOTEL
499
"Pushkin, Bakunin, Tolstoy, Dostoevsky, Kropotkin, Eroshenko."
"Eroshenko?"
"Never heard of Eroshenko? He was from Vladivostok, I'm sure."
Harry interrupts Estelle's memory. "What about the judo? Was he a blackbelt?" Harry's twisted elbow jerks with excitement.
Sen quips, "Harry, with your genes, maybe you'll be our next Bruce Lee."
Harry's fist jabs Sen in the stomach.
"Ouch."
"It's all about upper body strength," Harry insists.
"You fight like an insect," Sen complains. "I should know."
"Preying mantis-style," nods Harry.
Estelle ignores the banter and answers, "Art hung out with the Okinawans who were Communists and blackbelts. They taught him their moves. Oh, he could hold his own. He became a longshoreman, you know. Before the war, he was the only Japanese longshoreman around here. The Monday after Pearl Harbor, the FBI came and pulled him right off the docks."
"You bail him out again?"
"They had to let him go. He came out fuming. You think your brother Harry has a temper."
Sen shoots a look at Harry. Harry only looks innocuous and vulnerable.
Estelle continues, "Here, Art was a citizen, a Communist, antifascist, anti-imperialist Japan, but thrown in with the Japanese nationalists suspected of espionage. The day they released him, even before we got home, he made us stop to send a wire to Roosevelt to offer his services to destroy the Japanese imperialists."
"Didn't do much good."
"No. We got on those trains like everyone else."
"You didn't have to go."
Estelle doesn't reply, but Harry answers for her. "Mom didn't think twice about it."
Sen smiles. "Harry, you're such a romantic." He looks pointedly at his mother, but he doesn't have to remind her. While Arthur is in jail, the California Communist Party secretary calls a meeting of the Bay Area nisei CP members at the Hama household. It's announced that, in the interest of unity in the fight against imperialism, all members of Japan-
500
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
ese ancestry and their non-Japanese spouses, meaning Estelle, are suspended from membership for the duration of the war.
Estelle looks absently through the mural as if seeing another panorama. "As soon as we got to camp, Art was trying to enlist, trying to rally the antifascists. He joined Military Intelligence and was shipped off to Camp Savage in Minnesota. Several months later, you were born." She squeezes Sen's shoulder. "For the next years until they dropped the bomb, Art was fighting in Burma."
"What did you do?"
"I stayed behind in camp, raised Sen, taught grammar school, and painted. That's when I went to pencil and watercolors, partly because it was cheaper and more accessible. But I found my true medium. Art, of course, stopped painting entirely, but I never painted so much as during those days."
Estelle steps forward and crouches to rearrange the roses one last time. The thorns hook against the leaves and shake several orange and yellow petals to the floor.
"What year did he leave?"
"Nineteen fifty-one."
"It's been twenty-three years. A long time."
"How old would he be?"
"Sixty-six."
"In 1949, we had a plan to go to Paris to continue painting. But Harry was just born, and we had no money, so we thought Art would go alone. But he thought he'd better see his mother first, so he returned to Hiroshima instead. She was alive then, but he must have seen what happened after the bomb."
Arthur Hama returns from Hiroshima with a film of the devastation, taken by a Japanese filmmaker. He is advised that it is illegal to show this footage, but he finds his purpose is to defiantly show it everywhere. His audiences watch in silent horror as the film pans the ravaged expanse of his old home city. Now Hiroshima is a teetering net of crumpled steel structures, ghostly shadows of human beings vaporized in an instant. Deformed, crippled, and burned bodies, their wandering forms pass naked against an endless and desolate canvas. He becomes obsessed with a mission to reveal the truth about the atomic bomb.
I HOTEL
501
"Estelle," Arthur holds his head in his hands. "I fought the entire war to defeat Japanese fascism, but I can't justify the way we ended the war."
"And now Russia has the bomb too."
"It's a disaster."
"You can feel the hate rising all around us."
Arthur begins to travel for the World Peace Council. One day, he leaves America and keeps going.
"Well," says Estelle, "shall we go to the top now?"
The elevator rises two hundred feet to the top of Coit Tower, but there is a final flight of stairs to climb. Estelle walks up ahead, but Sen parks the wheelchair and scoops up his brother in his strong arms. "Come on Harry," he sighs. "This time, I'm not waiting for you. Let's go."
As they ascend the stairs, Harry asks, "Our dad left for Japan in fifty-one because of McCarthy and red-baiting, right?"
"That's what they say, deported under the McCarran Act. Look it up."
"I will. That's why Mom worked so hard to repeal it, right?"
"Yeah, but he was a u.s. citizen. My guess is that they could only threaten him with deportation. Think about it. He had medals from his service in the war."
"So why'd he leave?"
"He was on a mission."
"Yeah."
"Then he met a woman, Harry. She's the one who wrote Mom from Japan."
"Bastard."
"Guess that's why we never heard from him again."
"And all this time, I thought he was dead. Did he keep painting?"
"I don't know. Shit, Harry, you're heavy." Sen carries Harry to a window outlook and leans him against the stucco.
Estelle is already looking out. She points toward the cityscape and the white pyramid jutting into the skyline. "See the Transamerica over there? That's where the Monkey Building used to be." They walk the circle of the tower, peering across the city at each point: the Bay Bridge extending from the Ferry Building over Treasure Island to the East Bay, Alcatraz at the center beyond the docks, the Golden Gate with its red suspensions flowing over toward the Marin Headlands. It's a living mural
of the city on the clearest, bluest day of that crisp November.
On the day Arthur Hama dies, May 18,1974, India conducts its first nuclear underground explosion at Pokhran in Rajasthan. It is a device of about fifteen kilotons detonated at a depth of 107 meters, producing a crater reportedly having a radius of sixty meters and a depth of ten meters. India confidently describes it as a Peaceful Nuclear Explosive, or PNE. It is more commonly reported as the Smiling Buddha.
"Here's an odd story about Art," Estelle says. "He could speak Esperanto."
"What?"
"No really. He ran away from home at age fifteen to follow Vasily Eroshenko to Peking. Eroshenko was a writer, an anarchist, and proponent of Esperanto. He was also blind. Art studied with him, and Eroshenko gave him money to return home."
When they come full circle around the tower's lookout, Sen scoops up Harry once again and follows his mother down the narrow and curving staircase. From his perch in Sen's arms, Harry looks back one more time in the direction of the Transamerica. He sees that his mother must have saved one last flower. The red rose is perched against the window at a crooked angle.
502
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
503