2: Estelle Hama—Equality
In this historic year of 1975, thirty-seven years after its inception as the Dies Committee, later known as the House Un-American Activities Committee and later as the Internal Security Committee, the American Congress votes to abolish this once very powerful committee. Significantly, it is remembered that in the years following World War II, HUAC concentrates its efforts to investigate Communist and left-wing organizations. The most famous of these investigations are that of Alger Hiss, accused of being a spy, and that of the Hollywood Ten, writers and directors accused of Communist affiliations.
Furthermore, in 1950, HUAC sponsors the McCarran Internal Security Act. This act, also known as the Subversive Activities Control Act, is enacted in response to hearings by Senator Joseph P. McCarthy's Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, charged with uncovering evidence of Communist conspiracy and infiltration. The McCarran Act requires u.s. Communists to register as foreign agents, denies them passports, and excludes them from defense-industry employment.
Attached to the McCarran Act is Title II, authorizing the president of the United States, in the case of a national emergency, to apprehend and detain any person suspected as a threat to internal security. The precedent for Title II is the 1942 Executive Order 9066 signed by President Franklin D. Roosevelt to authorize wartime internment, in particular of American citizens of Japanese descent.
Estelle Hama stands before a framed copy of the 1942 poster that announces evacuation orders: Instructions to All Persons of Japanese Ancestry. It is the entry to the first art exhibition of her wartime work, all the collected drawings and watercolors of her years in a Japanese American concentration camp. The exhibit is sponsored by Japantown Art and Media or JAM.
Harry wheels up to Estelle and gestures to the work lining the walls and partitions. "I knew it was big, but I really didn't know. All these years you just had them in stacks around the house."
504
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
"They look so different framed." Estelle bites her lip.
"Sen did all the framing. I was up there at JAM helping him. I typed the titles. You know me. Search and peck." He smiles at his mother, gesturing with his fingers.
"I didn't give them all titles." Estelle looks confused.
"I know. I did."
"I'm not sure I approve of your taking such liberties." Estelle gives him her look, and Harry rolls away sheepishly, waving to a group of guests arriving for the show's opening.
Sen hangs the paintings tightly, mere inches between each, to maximize the small area of the room. All the work is at Estelle's eye level, and she moves slowly from drawing to drawing, painting to painting, memory to memory. The story of her days in camp unfolds as if it was yesterday. The harsh charcoal renderings seem the most real to her. She is surprised to see that a few of the sketches are actually letters, messages she sent on thin tissue paper to Arthur. Severe creases cut across the paper like memory, surviving Sen's efforts to press them under glass.
Sen appears at her side.
"Where did you find these?" she points at the letters.
"They were between everything else."
"I should have paid more attention."
"Harry rolled everything out of the house on his lap. Turned out to be a gold mine."
"What didn't you put up?" Estelle looks around the room, flustered.
"Oh, the repeats." Sen laughs.
"This is not an exhibition," she complains.
"No, it's a story finally revealed."
"I was obsessed," she almost whispers. "Who was going to know what happened to us? No one was coming to bail us out."
Sen puts his arm around his mother's shoulders. They stare into a portrait of themselves. Estelle is cradling her newborn at her breast. She's sitting on a wooden crate next to a potbelly stove in a mostly empty barrack, except for a line of diapers drying above. Their figures are contained in heavy charcoal shadows.
"I was never so lonely in all my life."
Estelle and Sen turn to the recognizable squeak of Harry's wheels, but
I HOTEL
505
his voice precedes him. They can hear his animated conversation approaching with a small contingent of well-wishers.
"Have you noticed?" asks Estelle. "Harry's becoming such a politician."
Sen groans. "Lucky he's confined to that chair."
"Can you imagine?" smiles Estelle, quickly wiping her eyes.
"Insufferable."
The group comes forward.
"Estelle!"
"It s, what can I say, very moving."
"Congratulations. Sen, you did a great job here."
"Yes, I don't think Estelle would have done this on her own."
"And mind you, Estelle can do just about anything on her own."
"It's a beautiful tribute to your mother."
"Estelle, aren't you proud?"
"This brings back such difficult memories. You capture so much here."
"We're very grateful to you."
"Everyone must see this."
"I remember this one," someone points to a watercolor. "You gave it to us for our Title II poster."
"When was that? Nineteen sixty-seven?"
"That's about when we started. It took four years, but we got Title II repealed in seventy-one."
"You know, Estelle said it then, but I didn't believe her."
"What's that?"
"Estelle, you said we ought to go for reparations. But now I'm coming around. I think that's our next battle."
Harry says, "Mom's a visionary."
Sen says, "It never ends."
Estelle says, "No, it never ends. By the way," she adds, "did you notice that Alger Hiss was reinstated into the Massachusetts bar? Twenty-five years later, the tables finally turn on Richard Nixon."
"Sometimes it takes twenty-five years."
Harry gestures around at Estelle's paintings. "Sometimes it takes thirty."
Estelle looks on at her two sons. They form a tableau against a backdrop of events they cannot know but must learn to remember. Sen stands
506
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
cross-armed with a strong stance, nodding at the comments of a visitor. Harry glad-hands folks and rolls forward to give them the tour. There's a woman standing to one side. Estelle thinks she might be Sen's new girlfriend, but as the evening grows, it seems more likely that she's interested in Harry.
Estelle's eye follows the succession of drawings to a particular scene in the makeshift camp hospital: she and another woman are lying on cots; both women contemplate their pregnant mounds, rising beneath the sheets. Estelle stares into the memory hidden in the drawing.
The woman turns to her and asks, "Your first?"
"Yes."
"This is my fourth."
"I could use your advice."
"Concentrate on your breathing. It will get you through the pain. It will come in waves. You have to ride it through."
"I see."
"What are you hoping for? Boy or girl?"
"I'm not particular."
"Names?"
"If it's a girl, Karla. If it's a boy, Sen."
"Sen?"
"My husband's choice. After Sen Katayama."
"I see." The woman becomes quiet and closes her eyes. She does not talk to Estelle again. Perhaps she has heard of Katayama, who is the founder of the Communist movement in Japan and buried in the Kremlin after an illustrious career in the Communist International.
Estelle smiles to herself. At least Arthur didn't insist on some Russian name like Vasily.
Someone is tapping Estelle's shoulder. "Hey, Estelle. I'm glad you finally agreed to this showing. It's been a long time coming."
"Oh, Tom, thanks for coming."
"Actually, I've got a favor to ask of you."
"O.K."
"There's a young sansei woman who's been in the news, arrested with Patty Hearst just a few days ago. Have you heard?"
"You know, I think I recognize her. She was my student when I taught
I HOTEL
507
those art classes at CCAC. I didn't last long, though. She, however, was very talented."
"Well, that's interesting. You know, she was born in camp."
"About Sen's age."
"Right. Estelle—"Tom pauses.
"She's going to need help."
"I thought you'd understand."
"Maybe we can solicit for bail money tonight."
"Thanks Estelle, you're amazing."
"Come here." She takes Tom's arm and draws him to a watercolor scene of toddlers playing in the sand. "That's Sen. These are his playmates. All born in a concentration camp."
"Estelle, she's in deep trouble. Maybe ballistics, kidnapping, and a murder hold-up."
"It doesn't matter. She deserves a fair trial."
Estelle backtracks several drawings and finds the darkest one in her memory. It's the night of the camp riot.
In Estelle's collection, Sen finds sketches of this painting and the painting itself recreated over and over again. He places all of them in a line across the floor and asks her to choose the one that most represents the event. She chooses not a pristine watercolor rendition but a dark angry charcoal. Days later, Sen finds himself in the library wanting to compare this drawing with something he has already seen. He finds a similar expression in a famous painting by Francisco Goya entitled The Third of May. In Goya's painting, a peasant among others, their bodies in bloody pools at his feet, raises his arms in a wide v just before his execution.
In Estelle's drawing, she faces a soldier pointing his bayoneted rifle and ready to shoot. She clutches a baby in one arm, and raises the other arm in protest. Like Goya's peasant, the child is swathed in light. And while her own face is darkly shadowed, Estelle's hair is starkly white in the same light that bathes the child.
"Halt! Who goes there?"
Estelle's heart grabs tightly at the sight of the soldier and his rifle. The stark searchlights blind her. She's nearly run into his bayonet. The baby must sense her fear, must hear her heart thundering at her breast. She can feel the child recoil and shudder, but he doesn't cry.
508
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
The soldier doesn't shoot. She thinks, He doesn't shoot. She's frozen in the dark night. The MP lowers his rifle. His young, white features relax to see another white person, a white woman. If she had not been white, what would he have done? He doesn't know that she no longer sees herself in him.
"We're on their death list," she sputters. "I tried to barricade the door. My neighbor's been killed in the confusion. Please protect my baby. Please."
"This is the night," Estelle explains to Sen, "my hair turned completely white."
"The night you turned hakujin."
"They called me keto baba. Maybe it was symbolic."
"What do you mean?"
"Well, like becoming a witch. Persecution goes back to the Inquisition."
Sen chuckles. "Why didn't my hair go white too?"
"I was never so scared."
"A tough lady like you?" Sen wonders about the woman who dodges bullets and tear gas to deliver men and women from jail.
"Maybe that's how tough people are tough," she speculates. "You lose what you don't need."
They stare across the room at Harry. He senses their attention and wheels around and waves. "Yeah," Sen nods.
The young woman who shows interest in Harry wheels him over. Harry introduces her. She wants to interview Estelle. They talk. Harry and Sen look on. At some point she asks Estelle, "How do you compare your experiences with, say, Dachau or Stalin's Gulag?"
Harry and Sen brace themselves for an onslaught, but Estelle replies calmly. "Well, I'm alive, aren't I?" She smiles and walks away to greet another friend.
Harry whispers up to Sen, "Is Mom still a Stalinist?"
"What do you think?"
As the guests trickle away, Sen stands alone in the gallery with Estelle.
"Where's Harry?"
"That reporter. They went off somewhere for drinks. Said he's going to educate her."
I HOTEL
509
"That was a stupid question." Estelle smiles wryly. "When are you going to get a girlfriend?"
"I had one. It was her birthday night before last."
1 see.
"I was over framing at JAM, and—"
"You forgot."
"When I looked, it was three a.m."
Estelle shakes her head.
Sen looks around. "Well, do you forgive me?"
"For losing your girlfriend?"
"No, for the way I put up the show."
"Diego Rivera said that the role of art is propaganda. Art is a revolutionary weapon."
"I turned your work into a weapon."
Estelle laughs. It's a big laugh. Then she says, "I forgot why I drew and painted in those years."
"You were a witness."
"Maybe that, but really, to survive."
"Now I know where your hair color went."
"Oh?"
Estelle swings slowly around the room. The dark charcoal and pencil lines and the rich earth watercolors call from the walls to her white halo.
Sen turns out the light.
510
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
3: Sen Hama—Fraternity
Nineteen seventy-six marks the Bicentennial of the great American Revolution that begins with the signing of the Declaration of Independence in Philadelphia by the Continental Congress. In the seven years following this declaration, the American colonies fight for their liberation from the British imperial monarchy, finally defeating King George in, Great Britain, and its allies. In this same bicentennial year, Jimmy Carter is elected president of the United States, and Alexander Solzhenitsyn, the Nobel Prize writer and author of The Gulag Archipelago, recently exiled from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, comes to live in Cavandish, Vermont.
"What would you know about Stalin?" Estelle fumes.
"It's what we don't know that worries me," argues Harry. "Why would Solzhenitsyn lie about this?"
"Solzhenitsyn writes fiction."
Sen is up in the loft of the Kearny Street Workshop gallery that was once the famous nightclub the Hungry i. On the Jackson Street side of the I-Hotel's brick structure, Sen has contributed to an expansive mural dedicated to the hotel tenants—now retired elderly Filipino and Chinese migrant workers. JAM and Kearny Street are preparing for a joint exhibition of photography and silkscreens. Sen prepares the colors for his silkscreen. He wants a gradated effect using a split-font technique. He can hear the argument downstairs. He remembers when Joseph Stalin dies, Estelle cries. He cries too, but Harry is a baby then. He looks over the side of the loft and sees Harry wheeling around with a paint roller on the end of a long pole and emphasizing his words in large swipes. His mother paints at an easel. "Hey, Harry," Sen interrupts, "when are you going to be done? We need that wall finished by tonight."
"Fiction?" Harry pushes the pole in emphasis.
Sen groans. He knows what's coming.
It's been a while, but he remembers the last night the "reporter girl"
I HOTEL
