"That was a stupid question." Estelle smiles wryly. "When are you going to get a girlfriend?"
"I had one. It was her birthday night before last."
1 see.
"I was over framing at JAM, and—"
"You forgot."
"When I looked, it was three a.m."
Estelle shakes her head.
Sen looks around. "Well, do you forgive me?"
"For losing your girlfriend?"
"No, for the way I put up the show."
"Diego Rivera said that the role of art is propaganda. Art is a revolutionary weapon."
"I turned your work into a weapon."
Estelle laughs. It's a big laugh. Then she says, "I forgot why I drew and painted in those years."
"You were a witness."
"Maybe that, but really, to survive."
"Now I know where your hair color went."
"Oh?"
Estelle swings slowly around the room. The dark charcoal and pencil lines and the rich earth watercolors call from the walls to her white halo.
Sen turns out the light.
510
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
3: Sen Hama—Fraternity
Nineteen seventy-six marks the Bicentennial of the great American Revolution that begins with the signing of the Declaration of Independence in Philadelphia by the Continental Congress. In the seven years following this declaration, the American colonies fight for their liberation from the British imperial monarchy, finally defeating King George in, Great Britain, and its allies. In this same bicentennial year, Jimmy Carter is elected president of the United States, and Alexander Solzhenitsyn, the Nobel Prize writer and author of The Gulag Archipelago, recently exiled from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, comes to live in Cavandish, Vermont.
"What would you know about Stalin?" Estelle fumes.
"It's what we don't know that worries me," argues Harry. "Why would Solzhenitsyn lie about this?"
"Solzhenitsyn writes fiction."
Sen is up in the loft of the Kearny Street Workshop gallery that was once the famous nightclub the Hungry i. On the Jackson Street side of the I-Hotel's brick structure, Sen has contributed to an expansive mural dedicated to the hotel tenants—now retired elderly Filipino and Chinese migrant workers. JAM and Kearny Street are preparing for a joint exhibition of photography and silkscreens. Sen prepares the colors for his silkscreen. He wants a gradated effect using a split-font technique. He can hear the argument downstairs. He remembers when Joseph Stalin dies, Estelle cries. He cries too, but Harry is a baby then. He looks over the side of the loft and sees Harry wheeling around with a paint roller on the end of a long pole and emphasizing his words in large swipes. His mother paints at an easel. "Hey, Harry," Sen interrupts, "when are you going to be done? We need that wall finished by tonight."
"Fiction?" Harry pushes the pole in emphasis.
Sen groans. He knows what's coming.
It's been a while, but he remembers the last night the "reporter girl"
I HOTEL
comes to dinner. He's forgotten her name now, but that's what they all call her, even Harry. By this dinner, she and Harry date regularly. She's always at the house. Sen can't remember why he's at that dinner too, but he is. He remembers that Harry is waving some typewritten papers around. Harry says, "Listen, you've got to read this. It's great stuff."
The reporter girl looks embarrassed and says, "Harry—"
"Really," he insists, "I think you should get it published."
Estelle takes the papers from Harry's excited hand. "Harry, you're going to get ice cream all over it." She looks at the title page with interest and sits back in her chair to read. Pretty soon she's immersed in her reading, chuckling and smiling. When she's finished, she looks up and says, "It's really a wonderful story about you and your uncle. Is he still alive?"
Harry's girlfriend smiles. "Actually, he's not my uncle. And that's not me but my friend who told me the story."
"But you write I."
"Yes, because it seems more natural, and I also had an uncle who was like that, but of course that didn't happen to my uncle. Well, it's a bit embellished."
Estelle pushes the story across the table and says tepidly, "I see." She stands and begins to clear the table.
"So," says Harry, "what do you think? Best American Short Stories, right?"
"I wouldn't know." Estelle moves away with a pile of dishes. "You know I don't read fiction."
Sen, Harry, and the reporter girl all watch Estelle walk away coolly into the kitchen. Sen looks at the reporter girl, who sits moving her ice cream around her dish in disappointment and confusion. Meanwhile, Harry rolls after his mother. Their muffled voices can be heard from the kitchen. Suddenly, the reporter girl jumps up and runs out of the house. Sen picks up the story from the table and starts to chase after her. He stops midway, shrugs, and returns to finish his ice cream.
Sen calls down from the loft to Estelle, hoping to divert the storm. "Maybe you could come up here and check the colors for me?" he asks his mother.
But Harry is relentless. "What's wrong with fiction?" He's already heard the answer how many times, but asks as if it's a new argument.
512
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
"Fiction twists the truth. It's all lies. It's because of fiction we get in trouble. It's because of fiction that we get put in jail, get persecuted, framed, lied to by politicians."
"Right, that's how Solzhenitsyn got into the Gulag."
"You haven't thought about how he got into the u.s. His sort of anti-socialism is very convenient propaganda."
At that moment, someone appears through the gallery doors with a large box. "Hey, Sen, you here?"
"Yeah!" Sen yells from above.
"I brought my stuff." Leland Wong is one of the exhibiting artists. He sees Estelle at her easel and says politely, "Hi, Mrs. Hama. Hey, Harry."
She waves at him with her brush.
Sen points, "How about you use that far wall over there? Harry's still painting that side."
"Hey," Leland says, "I got some spots we can use for lighting. What do you think?"
Sen comes down to look at the spotlights. "Hey, where'd you get these?"
"Let's just say we borrowed them on a long-term basis."
"Long as they don't come get 'em this weekend."
Harry says, "Hey, Leland, you read Solzhenitsyn?"
"What?"
"Tell my mom. The Gulag is nonfiction. It's based on real-life testimonies and Solzhenitsyn's life in the camps."
"I don't know, Harry."
"Way she talks, you'd think fiction was fascism."
Leland looks at Sen, who shakes his head. "Harry, leave Leland out of this." He looks at Estelle, who's ignoring them. "You want to cross swords with the Stalinist, be my guest."
Harry swings his painting pole around like it's a lance. "Sir Estelle, I've thrown down my gauntlet. What say thee?"
Estelle parries her brush back at Harry. "Watch it. You're spattering."
Sen looks at Leland. "Don't mind them. This is a regular thing." He looks out the door. "Hey, where's your work?"
"Out in the truck. Give me a hand."
They go back and forth, bringing in framed silkscreens and photography.
"Line it up over here so we can take a look," says Sen.
I HOTEL
They stand back from the wall and pause to look, but Leland says, "I gotta go pick up Nancy's stuff, then Rich's. I'll be back." He runs out.
Estelle walks over to take a closer look. She pauses in front of each piece. "I like the photography," she says. "Why is he doing this comic book stuff?"
"I like it," says Sen.
"I like it too," says Harry. "I like the colors."
Both Sen and Estelle stare at Harry, whose face is sprayed with tiny dots of white paint. He rolls back to his wall painting.
Estelle gestures. "It's farcical. Too commercial."
"You haven't seen underground comics," says Sen. "It's not what you think."
"Farcical. Fictional." Harry slaps paint into the wall and mutters out loud.
Sen says, "Social real for you is like the party line."
Estelle counters, "I don't tell people what to paint."
"This is not art for art's sake. It's got a message, if you want message."
"Silkscreens have a history," Estelle informs. "They go back to the WPA and before that to the Bolsheviks, when those artists wanted to develop a cheap and accessible way to create posters, but they did it with a certain aesthetic in mind."
"Right, and it's art made accessible to the people. What could be more accessible than comics?" Sen argues.
"It's not serious."
"This is not serious?" Sen stands in front of a piece with a large mushroom cloud. Bursting forth and resting in its pillow is a chubby, Buddha-like baby.
"It deflates a tragic image to the level of the comic book superhero."
Harry rolls back into the conversation. "This one here is my favorite." He points. "Godzilla." In this scene, Godzilla roars with a fiery tongue, a giant lizard looming over the remains of the Hiroshima dome. In one pincer hand he grips Nixon, who is hugging a red, white, and blue missile. In the other hand Godzilla grips Brezhnev, who is hugging a red missile marked with the hammer and sickle.
They stare at the cartoon images of the great leaders, one of them now defunct.
Sen asks, "Do you buy this idea about the bomb?"
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
Harry asks, "What's that?"
"That Truman dropped the bomb to scare the Soviets and to keep Stalin from entering into surrender negotiations with Japan."
Estelle nods. "I think that's true. Japan had already lost the war."
"That's why two hundred thousand people died?" Harry flails around. "How can you continue to support these alignments? It's not about people. It's just about ideology."
"You don't understand. It is about people. It's not about individual choice. Once a position is discussed and a decision made, the unity of the Party and the united action of all the people are its strength."
"But what about the Hiroshima people?" Harry wails.
"We're not talking about them. The decision to bomb was not Stalin's. It was Truman's. It was an American decision based on racism, anticom-munism, and American imperialism."
"Ism, ism, ism," Harry gestures erratically.
"Oh, you're impossible." Estelle throws up her hands.
Sen remembers his project up in the loft and runs upstairs. He applies paint and squeegees it across the silk, lifts the frame, examines the print, then removes and places it on the drying rack. He places another sheet of paper, carefully matching the masking tape markings on the table. He thinks back.
His roommate JB smokes as usual. They both nurse their beers, but Sen doesn't smoke. .    JB says, "The work you did for the poster presentation was really great."
"Thanks," says Sen. "Glad to help."
"Have you thought about joining?" He means joining the J-Town Collective.
"Yeah, but I don't need to join to help out."
"You've got a point."
"Listen, I got this name Sen, after the founder of Japanese Communism." Sen takes a long draft from his mug. "You know what I'm say-ing?"
"Yeah, man. I can relate." JB lights up another cigarette.
Sen coughs. "Growing up, I had to go to mass meetings. I was ostracized in school because my mom was an open Communist. Kids ran around yelling, 'Kill the Commies!'"
I HOTEL	515
Sen remembers being nine years old and complaining to his mother about not having any friends. Estelle is on the phone strategizing for the next meeting. She puts the phone down momentarily and speaks to her son optimistically. It's like a continuation of her phone call. "It's easy, Sen. Just say hello to someone new every day, and pretty soon, you'll have new friends."
This works for Harry but not Sen. Sen is unbearably shy.
Sen and JB order another round of beers. "Ever hear of the W. E. B. DuBois Club?"
JB shakes his head.
"Yeah, well, I was in that for a while, until Czechoslovakia."
   Estelle warns, "Don't get recruited into one of those ultra-leftist Maoist groups. Lenin warns about ultra-left sectarianism that destroys unity."
"But," Sen protests, "I'm not even in the CP. What does it matter?"
"I'm just warning you," Estelle says. "All these groups springing up have nationalist tendencies."
"But you live in Japantown. You turned Japanese ages ago."
"Look what happened to the SDS," Estelle continues. "Splintered into factions."
"I organized antiwar demos with them," says Sen. "I never joined."
"I know. New Left," Estelle sighs. "Infantile leftism."
"What do you mean? You supported it."
"Until they became a liability. A distraction, really."
"Why do you stay? The Party's over. Harry's right. You can't possibly support the Soviet Union anymore."
"Change doesn't come overnight. You don't know the struggles we've been through and what we've achieved. If you look back, you can see a history of failures that are really steps to revolution. You can't abandon the Party just because times are difficult."
"They abandoned you."
"That's been rectified, and I struggled for that change."
Sen continues to slather each paper with a streak of color and to lay the copies in the drying trays. He remembers an ex-girlfriend.
They drive south out of the city. He's leaving her off at Stanford, where she goes to school. He remembers the moment when he knows their relationship ends. He drives through an area of rolling hills and pasture.
516
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
She says, "Look at this beautiful land. It's so gorgeous." He smiles to agree. It's a beautiful sunny day.
"Just think of it," she says enthusiastically. "One of these days, this will all belong to the people."
Harry's voice intrudes. Sen thinks his mother and brother can only go at each other for so long. It's always the same. Soon Harry will blow up. Sen starts the process for the next color. The scene is from a photograph. A young sansei, Goro Tanaka, carries an elderly issei man down the steps from the senior center. Sen captures the image while he works at the center. Over time, Sen becomes the driver who takes the elderly to their doctors' appointments. He also carts around meals to old folks who are homebound and unable to cook for themselves. Some days he digs up the soil in the community garden to help the old men plant tomatoes. He moves between community work and his paid job at the People's Warehouse. All of his silkscreens are idyllic scenes from community life. He realizes that his work creates an opposition to his mother's dark representations of imprisonment.
Harry's voice rises to the loft. For some reason, they are back to talking about fiction and, now, the reporter girl. "Who's to say that her story is not art?" Harry says.
"It might be," Estelle concedes. "It's the art of storytelling." Estelle nods and continues to paint. "Storytelling was no reason to run her out of the house." "I didn't run her out of the house," Estelle protests. "If she wanted, she'd be back. Don't use me as an excuse."
"Excuse?" Harry continues, "What about your storytelling? How come you told Sen and me that our dad was dead?"
"But he was dead. Dead to us as a family. He made choices, Harry. You were only three when he left. Sen was eight. He kept asking when Art would return. I couldn't bear it any longer."
"You lied to us! That's fiction!" Harry throws down his paint roller. Sen
comes down the stairs. He watches Harry roll angrily out the gallery door.
He looks at his mother, who tries to concentrate on her painting. "You
knew that was coming," he says to her. "It's not about Arthur," he assures
her, because she looks hurt.
I HOTEL
"I know," she replies. "He's still mad about losing his girlfriend."
"It is your fault, you know."
"My fault?" Estelle looks up indignantly. "If she liked Harry that much, she'd still be around."
"No, I mean, it's your fault that Harry can't see that. He thinks he's like everyone else. Plus he thinks he's invincible. He's got no idea of his limitations. You did that."
"I treated you the same as Harry."
"I know." Sen nods. "What happened?"
"You liked to read. Harry never seemed to have time. You're more introspective. You still like to think more than to act."
"I'm theory. Harry's practice."
"Worked out fine." Estelle gestures. "No one is going to hand Harry anything. I knew that the day he was born with the cord around his neck."
Sen remembers Harry as a kid on an office chair with wheels, whirling around until he's dizzy. Harry wants speed. Sen thinks he wants speed too, but he knows his own limitations. Sen remembers being nineteen and taking his first motorcycle out to the Arroyo Seco speedway. He wants to be a race car driver. There's an opportunity to test a new Ford GTO. It can go 200 miles an hour. The trainer says, "Don't go faster than 150. You got that?" But Sen doesn't watch his speed, and it is exhilarating. When he looks, he's going 170. He can hear the trainer at his side yelling furiously at him through his helmet. When he stops the car, he's still yelling. "I told you! Not over 150! You wanna race, first thing you gotta learn is to follow instructions. You're not racing material. Get out of here!" "But—" protests Sen. "Get out!"
Sen leaves angrily and takes his motorcycle to Salinas. He parks next to an old saloon and goes in. Inside, his eyes adjust to the dark, and he finds himself among a group of Mexican workers. Beer and tequila make the rounds, and Sen forgets he's not racing material and takes off again on his bike. Somewhere down the road, a cop stops him. "Just a routine check," the cop says. "Let's see the registration on that thing. We got a lookout for stolen bikes." "The bike's mine," Sen says.
518
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
"You'll need to prove it." "Fuck you."
"That's not the right attitude, son." The cop grabs Sen, pulls him forward, and drives his knee into his stomach.
Sen falls into the dirt. His stomach clenches and releases in waves from the punch of the cop's knee but also from the beer and tequila. He heaves a fistful of vomit onto the cop's dusty black boots.
"Oh, shit." The cop looks down at his boots. "Now you really made a mistake there," he grumbles. He shakes off the vomit and walks to his car. Sen can see him strutting back with his stick. When the cop gets close, Sen balls up his fist and punches hard into his crotch. As the man staggers and falls back, Sen jumps back onto his bike and races away. He returns to the bar and the Mexicans who are still trading tequila shots. "Don't worry," they say. They all go next door into a shack. They drag his motorcycle into the shack. "No problem, see?" they say.
But Sen can hear the cop asking outside, "You see a chink kid come 'round here on a bike?"
"Hey, I got a plan," whispers one man. "I take my bike and go that way. Make a diversion. You get ready and go that way. Ready?" "You sure?"
"Yeah, we fuck the fucking gringo," he sneers. Sen gets ready.
"Buena suerte," says the man and takes a last shot of tequila. Sen can hear him charge out of the backside of the shack and circle around and away. Soon he hears the commotion and rev of the police car behind. Someone even yells, "There he goes!"
When the sound of the car is in the far distance, the rest of the men yell, "Go!" and Sen goes. From country roads, he slips into the traffic of Highway 101 but keeps to the speed limit.
Sen returns to his silkscreen. He wonders why he likes this work. Maybe it's the intricate and precise mechanics—tracing the exacto knife in fine lines on stencil, peeling up the film, filling negative space with positive color. He thinks the silkscreen process creates limitations, planned layers and discrete spaces, boundaries where color can and cannot go. He scrutinizes his picture of a young man carrying an old man down stairs. He realizes it could be himself, carrying Harry.
I HOTEL	519
Estelle comes up to look at his work. She says, "I'm not sure about the
colors."
"What do you mean?"
"Maybe a little more strength in this area," she says.
"I like it subdued."
"Hmmm," says Estelle. "Just a bit more muscle."
He adds the color that Estelle suggests. They compare the results. "I still like it subdued," he says. "It feels more real to me. Just the way it is, like everyday life."
Estelle ponders the difference. "This one is more ..." she searches for the word.
"Heroic," answers Sen.
"Yes." Estelle nods and returns to her painting.
Sen follows her downstairs. He looks over Estelle's painting. It's Harry in his wheelchair charging with the long pole. Ludicrously, the paint roller hangs at the end. Facing Harry's pole is Godzilla holding a large pinwheel.
"See," says Estelle. "I can do comics, too."
"Harry imagines that he walks like everyone else."
"But he does, doesn't he?" Estelle continues with a rush of strokes against her easel.
"Now, Mrs. Hama, you've got to admit that that's fiction. It's like, what do you call it, the 'dream work of revolutionary ideas.'"
"I didn't think of that."
"You've battered him about so much, you've transformed his consciousness."
"Not bad." Estelle smiles. "That's why Harry doesn't have to do art."
Sen laughs. "Harry is a work of art."
520
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
4: Harry Hama—Humanity
On April 4,1977, President Fidel Castro of the Republic of Cuba arrives at Vnukovo Airport in Moscow and is hugged planeside by Soviet President Nikolai Podgorny, General Secretary of the Communist Party Leonid Brezhnev, Premier Alexei Kosygin, and Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko. Presidents Podgorny and Castro repeat their call for an end to apartheid governments in Rhodesia and South Africa and their pledge to support anti-imperialist forces and armed struggle on the African continent. During President Castro's visit to Moscow, Secretary Leonid Brezhnev confirms the failure of the American Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance's mission to negotiate constructive limitations of strategic nuclear weapons. This is a grave setback for the American President Jimmy Carter, who pledges in his election campaign for the elimination of all nuclear weapons on earth. While the American government presses for diplomatic resolutions over armed revolution in Third World conflicts, and for the USSR to conform to human rights agreements under the 1975 Helsinki Accords, President Carter now favors the development of the neutron bomb, also called an enhanced radiation warhead, a small thermonuclear weapon that theoretically produces minimal blast and heat but releases a large amount of lethal radiation, destroying life but leaving buildings intact.
The day after the Cuban president's historic visit to Moscow, sixty handicapped persons take over the fourth floor of the San Francisco regional offices of the United States Department of Health, Education, and Wel-fare. The Federal Building itself is an old construction built in the 1930s under the Works Projects Administration of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt's New Deal. As Harry Hama and others on wheelchairs take their strategic positions within the building, they pay homage to FDR, a closet cripple. Similar nationwide protests are staged in Washington, D.C.; Los Angeles; Chicago; and New York. Only the San Francisco contingent remains camped out in their HEW offices for the next twenty-eight days.
I HOTEL
521