Estelle comes up to look at his work. She says, "I'm not sure about the
colors."
"What do you mean?"
"Maybe a little more strength in this area," she says.
"I like it subdued."
"Hmmm," says Estelle. "Just a bit more muscle."
He adds the color that Estelle suggests. They compare the results. "I still like it subdued," he says. "It feels more real to me. Just the way it is, like everyday life."
Estelle ponders the difference. "This one is more ..." she searches for the word.
"Heroic," answers Sen.
"Yes." Estelle nods and returns to her painting.
Sen follows her downstairs. He looks over Estelle's painting. It's Harry in his wheelchair charging with the long pole. Ludicrously, the paint roller hangs at the end. Facing Harry's pole is Godzilla holding a large pinwheel.
"See," says Estelle. "I can do comics, too."
"Harry imagines that he walks like everyone else."
"But he does, doesn't he?" Estelle continues with a rush of strokes against her easel.
"Now, Mrs. Hama, you've got to admit that that's fiction. It's like, what do you call it, the 'dream work of revolutionary ideas.'"
"I didn't think of that."
"You've battered him about so much, you've transformed his consciousness."
"Not bad." Estelle smiles. "That's why Harry doesn't have to do art."
Sen laughs. "Harry is a work of art."
520
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
4: Harry Hama—Humanity
On April 4,1977, President Fidel Castro of the Republic of Cuba arrives at Vnukovo Airport in Moscow and is hugged planeside by Soviet President Nikolai Podgorny, General Secretary of the Communist Party Leonid Brezhnev, Premier Alexei Kosygin, and Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko. Presidents Podgorny and Castro repeat their call for an end to apartheid governments in Rhodesia and South Africa and their pledge to support anti-imperialist forces and armed struggle on the African continent. During President Castro's visit to Moscow, Secretary Leonid Brezhnev confirms the failure of the American Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance's mission to negotiate constructive limitations of strategic nuclear weapons. This is a grave setback for the American President Jimmy Carter, who pledges in his election campaign for the elimination of all nuclear weapons on earth. While the American government presses for diplomatic resolutions over armed revolution in Third World conflicts, and for the USSR to conform to human rights agreements under the 1975 Helsinki Accords, President Carter now favors the development of the neutron bomb, also called an enhanced radiation warhead, a small thermonuclear weapon that theoretically produces minimal blast and heat but releases a large amount of lethal radiation, destroying life but leaving buildings intact.
The day after the Cuban president's historic visit to Moscow, sixty handicapped persons take over the fourth floor of the San Francisco regional offices of the United States Department of Health, Education, and Wel-fare. The Federal Building itself is an old construction built in the 1930s under the Works Projects Administration of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt's New Deal. As Harry Hama and others on wheelchairs take their strategic positions within the building, they pay homage to FDR, a closet cripple. Similar nationwide protests are staged in Washington, D.C.; Los Angeles; Chicago; and New York. Only the San Francisco contingent remains camped out in their HEW offices for the next twenty-eight days.
I HOTEL
521
Harry Hama's appointment is with the HEW regional director, Joe Maldonado. He wheels in with three others, also in wheelchairs.
"Mr. Maldonado," Harry addresses the director, "The Rehabilitation Act was passed by Congress in 1973 over President Nixon's veto, but it was never implemented. The disabled community supported the election of Jimmy Carter with the understanding that he would instruct the new HEW secretary, your boss, Joseph Califano, to implement those regulations to enforce our civil rights. We are especially concerned with Section 504 of the act, which prohibits discrimination of any qualified individual by reason of his or her disability from programs or employment supported by federal funding."
"Mr. Hama," the director interrupts. "I am aware of the provisions of the act."
"Mr. Maldonado," Harry returns, "then you are also aware that President Carter was inaugurated in January, and it is now April, and we in the disabled community are tired of waiting. It has already been four years since the act itself was passed."
"Harry." The director put his hand up.
"Joe?" Harry answers.
"What are you guys trying to pull? I've had one meeting after the next with your people all afternoon. Don't you already know that I'm on your side?"
Harry pulls up his arm and glances at his watch. He waves a paper in front of the director. "Can I read you the provisions in Section 504?"
"You can read the whole act. My hands are tied until it's signed and the funding is released."
Jim in the wheelchair next to Harry offers, "Let me read it."
The director sighs as Jim reads in a steady monotone. Harry nods to an attendant behind him and excuses himself. In the hallway outside the office, he sees other disabled protestors and says, "O.K., pass the word. We're going to stay here tonight. We're going to stay as long as it takes." He watches two deaf people sign to each other, and a blind person down the hall taps away in excitement. Three people on crutches with large backpacks wave and follow Harry back toward the director's office. One of them says to Harry, "There're maybe three hundred of us out on the street by now!"
522
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
"How many inside?"
"Fifty?"
"That'll do for starters. You got fifty sleeping bags?"
"We got six here, two apiece. Got to smuggle in more."
"Do what you can. I got mine." Harry is sitting on his bag, which is folded under him like a cushion. "What about the walkie-talkies?"
One of the men on crutches shifts the pack behind him and gestures. "Right here. We got at least two sets. One set for inside. And one split to the outside."
Harry checks his watch and smiles. "Half hour to closing."
The counselor at City College smiles. He's a handsome black man with a large Afro. He says, "Harry, do you attend a church?"
"Why?"
"Well, you could talk to the pastor. My pastor, for example, would be very understanding."
"About what?"
"It's possible he could offer you some jobs around the church."
"That's your advice?"
"On the practical side of things—"
"I came in here to arrange my classes, and this is the sort of counseling I get? I need an action plan for the next two years to transfer to State, and I could use a scholarship, and you want to talk about church? Who do you think I am?"
"I didn't mean—"
"That's all you have to offer? You call yourself a counselor?" Harry bangs his fist on the man's desk. He swings his chair around and storms out the door. "Get me another counselor!"
Harry rolls his chair in reverse and feels the slight tilt of the chair to one side, accompanied by a yell. "Ow! Ouch! Ouch! Ouch!"
He quickly maneuvers the chair forward again and circles around to see a young woman hopping on one foot around her cane. "Oh, that hurts. That hurts," she whimpers.
"I'm really sorry," Harry apologizes. It's the second day of the HEW sit-
in.
I HOTEL
523
"You should be looking where you're going," she admonishes.
"You should be looking where you're going."
"What did you say?" she asks.
"Are you deaf?" he taunts.
"Are you blind?"
"No, you're blind."
"How do you know I'm blind?"
"Because you have a white-tipped cane, and you're wearing dark glasses."
"Goddamn cripple."
"How's your foot. Are you crippled now, too?"
"Maybe you broke my toe."
"Let me see your toe."
"Are you a doctor?"
"I'm considering it."
She removes her shoe and sock and sticks her foot up. Harry reaches for the bare foot and examines the toes. "You're lucky I'm not fat and not in one of those electric chairs. Those weigh a ton. You know, like a steamroller. Then these puppies would be smashed." He presses each toe, and she winces.
"I don't want to be a cripple."
"Better than being blind."
"How do you know?"
"Because I'm a cripple. Crippled's the best disability, I'd say."
"Oh, you're crazy!" She taps around with her cane and then gets down on the floor searching for her shoe, but Harry reaches over and takes it. "O.K.," she says, "where is it? Give me my shoe."
Harry wheels away and says, "I think we should get that foot of yours on ice."
"Where are you going?" She hobbles behind with one bare foot sticking and peeling off the marble floor after him. "Come back!"
Harry can hear himself among the ten CANE protestors locked inside the director's office of the Western Addition Redevelopment Administration. "THE PEOPLE UNITED WILL NEVER BE DEFEATED!" The director sits at his desk with his hands clasped, staring into space over the
524
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
heads of the protestors chained to each other and sitting on the floor. Only Harry in his wheelchair can see the director's bored, simply waiting for the police outside to bust open the door. The police break in, and there is a flurry of commotion as they cut through the chains and drag out each protestor. Harry watches the eighth protestor pulled away and waits patiently for his turn, but no police come back to take him out. Harry yells out the door from the office, "The people united will never be defeated," but the sounds of protest and struggle fade down the hallway. "Hey!" he yells. "Hey!" No one returns to make his arrest.
The fifth day of the sit-in is a Saturday, and the federal building is empty except for the disabled protestors occupying the fourth floor with the guards. Around noon, they are all eating pizza and by late afternoon, a card game is going on, and there are wheelchair races down the wide corridors. Harry is around the corner from the commotion. He can hear the cheers go up and then from behind him, "Don't back up. I'm right here."
He turns his head and sees the blind girl. "How's your foot?" he asks.
"The swelling's gone down," she answers, then asks, "Why aren't you racing with the others?"
"You wanna borrow my chair?"
"Oh, you've got a radio?" She hears the channels changing.
"Yeah, I was hoping to hear the game."
"Game?"
"Baseball. Dodgers are playing the Giants this weekend at Chavez Ravine."
"So you're a Giants fan."
"No, I'm not. Do I look like a Giants fan?"
"How should I know what you look like?"
He scoffs, "I bet you do know. How did you know I wasn't racing?"
"I didn't hear your voice, and besides, the right wheel of your chair squeaks."
"Damn," he says. "Batteries must be going."
"So you aren't from San Francisco?"
"I am. But the Dodgers are my team." He turns up the volume on the portable radio, but the sound only grows dimmer. "Damn."
I HOTEL
525
"Oh, that's too bad," she commiserates.
"I missed the game on Thursday."
"Oh yes," she needles him. "What with this sit-in going on and all."
He ignores her. "Don Sutton pitched, beat San Francisco five to one." He pries open the radio and dumps the dead batteries out in disgust.
Her hands reach forward, touching the radio, then snatching away one of the fallen batteries. "I'm hungry," she says. "Aren't you? There's still some pizza left, I bet." She walks away.
Sometime later, she stops him in the corridor. "Oh, there you are. Where are you going?"
"I was thinking I'd grease this wheel so that I become invisible to the blind."
She's hugging her sleeping bag and says, "Hey, I've got something for you." She whispers, "Is he around?"
"Who?"
"The guard."
"No."
She pulls out a long flashlight hidden inside her bag. "I borrowed this from him."
"Come on," he says, escorting her around the corridor to a quiet spot.
They trade out the batteries and tune in the radio.
"It's the fourth inning," he says. "Two zip. Dodgers winning."
Harry joins the busload of folks heading up to Tule Lake to visit the old site of the segregation center used to incarcerate Japanese Americans during World War II. They pitch tents and set up camp. The next morning, Harry can hear the gunning of a motorcycle outside his tent. He hears the motor go silent and the voice of his brother, Sen: "Hey Harry, get up. I could use some grub."
Harry peeks out of his pup tent with a sleepy eye. "How did you know I was here?"
Sen crouches down and looks at Harry with some amusement. "Well, you got your car parked out here like a beacon." He points to Harry's chair outside the tent.
Harry pulls himself outside and props himself up. He yells out, "Hey, anyone for breakfast?"
526
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
Someone stirs in another tent. "Shit, Harry, go back to sleep. It's only five a.m."
Harry looks at Sen and shrugs.
Sen smiles. "Wanna take a ride?" He points to a mountain outcrop that juts out of the landscape. "Let's see how close we can get to that."
"Castle Rock." Harry nods.
Sen gestures with his head to the back of his Kawasaki 500, and Harry struggles to swing his limp legs over the back saddle. "Hang on," says Sen. He guns the motor, and the two putter away over the sand and gravel of the dry lake bed.
Sen and Harry circle, looking for trails that the bike can climb. They zigzag around in the cool morning air. The July sunlight breaks over the skies with the promise of temperatures up to ninety degrees by the afternoon. "Hell of a place to be imprisoned," remarks Sen.
"Nothing left. No barbed wire. No guard towers. Not even the foundations of the barracks," notes Harry.
"I'm starved," says Sen. "I've been on the road since midnight."
"Let's head back," agrees Harry.
They head down a slight incline for several hundred yards when a rattlesnake slithers across the road. Sen swerves to avoid it, then corrects his direction, but it's too late. The bike slides off into a gully, then skids into a fast downhill. Harry slips from the back of the saddle and sees the shiny body of the Kawasaki skid, hit some rocky impediment, and flip in a large wheelie. When Harry comes to, he's staring at a small pile of tiny white seashells. In the distance down the rocky slope he can see the white motorbike on its side. "Sen?" he calls. He can't move one of his legs at all, but he pulls up on his elbows and presses the hard dusty surface with this forearms and hands. He can see Sen's figure sprawled near a bowl of sagebrush. It takes all his effort to drag his body in that direction, crawling like a slow lizard. aSen," he calls. Sweat and blood obscure his vision. To crawl those few yards to reach his brother takes a lifetime. When he reaches Sen perhaps thirty minutes later, he knows the twisted position of Sen's neck is not natural.
Around the tenth day of the sit-in, the disabled protestors gather for a meeting. Someone says, "We need to keep up our spirits and our momentum."
I HOTEL
527
Another says, "I could sure use a bath."
"I might have to leave to see my doctor."
"Seeing your doctor is a valid excuse, but not a bath."
"If he wants a bath, let him leave."
"But don't bother to come back."
Harry breaks in, "Congressman Burton was here, and he got us a telephone line out to get medical supplies and food. He also says he's going to conduct hearings right here."
"That will be good press coverage."
"So we've got a congressman involved, how about the mayor? The governor?"
"Harry, you know the mayor."
"I know him from before, when he was supervisor. He helped us fight for access at SF State."
"I suggest we send Harry out to talk to these guys. Send Harry to Sacramento. Get some promises and support."
"I could use some help," says Harry. "Maybe an assistant."
"I volunteer."
Harry looks to see who's volunteering; it's the blind girl.
"By the way," she says, "my name is Clara. I'm with the Center for Independent Living in Berkeley."
When they return from Sacramento with a declaration signed by Governor Brown, Clara asks Harry, "How are we going to get back into the federal building?"
"Let's go to city hall."
At city hall, the receptionist says, "Hey Harry, haven't seen you in a while." She winks. "You know, we're all for you."
"Thank you. So, is he in?"
"Have you got an appointment?
Harry smiles.
"I'll see what I can do."
In the next hour, Clara and Harry are in an entourage following Mayor Moscone down the walkway from city hall to the federal building across the street. The disabled protestors lining the front of the building cheer and part the way.
The mayor looks into the cameras and says, "We have 120 demonstra-
528
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
tors here who are being denied medical and hygienic assistance, and this in the building that professes to support the health, education, and welfare of the people. I'm personally sending in showers, towels, and soap, and I want them installed."
A reporter approaches the mayor and asks, "Sir, what do you say to the commissioner who said yesterday that he's not running a hotel here?"
"These demonstrators are not going to leave. Four are on a hunger strike. We're putting their lives at risk."
Estelle is seated at his bedside. Harry opens his eyes then shuts them again tightly, pretending to sleep.
"Harry," Estelle says with exasperation. "Open your eyes."
Harry opens one eye and looks sheepishly at his mother.
"If you're going to try to kill yourself, make a better effort next time," she says.
"Sorry," he says.
"I didn't mean that," she apologizes.
"I know," he says. "But I deserve it."
"That's right," she replies.
"I had a vision," he says.
"Oh?"
"I saw Sen."
"We're Communists. We don't see dead people."
"I know." Harry chuckles drowsily. "I always knew I wasn't really a Communist."
Estelle smiles.
"He told me I wasn't going to join him in heaven. I was going to hell."
"Heaven? Hell? Miserable defectors," Estelle sniffs.
"That's when I threw up."
"They still had to pump your stomach."
"If we don't believe in heaven or hell, what do we believe in?"
"What a foolish question. We believe in history and," Estelle thinks for a moment, "and in names."
"Names?"
"Harry Bridges. You were named for Bridges, and until last night you were as tough and stubborn as Harry Bridges."
I HOTEL
529
Harry pushes himself to sit up. "I guess I miss Sen." "I miss him too." Estelle takes Harry's hand in hers. "But"—she squeezes him hard—"you've got your own promises to keep."
Back in the federal building, it's the end of another day of sit-in and protest. Harry says, "For a blind girl, you weren't such a bad assistant at all."
"I'm a qualified individual. I just need access to my job." Clara follows Harry down the corridor, then a turn and a turn again. The conversations, singing, and card games echo away and become distant. She unzips and zips together their two sleeping bags. Then she helps Harry from his chair. "Here," she says. She unties his shoes and places them to one side. She unbuttons his shirt and pulls it gently away. She unzips his pants and pulls them away as well. She folds everything neatly in a pile, then tucks Harry between the soft folds of the bags, plumping up the down for a makeshift pillow.
"You know when I fell in love with you," he says. "It was really only a few days ago."
"Oh? When you found out my family used to live in Chavez Ravine?"
"Well, that, but it was when I saw your face all wet with beer."
It's a secret, but in between negotiations and meetings, Harry and Clara sneak into Candlestick Park. He even brings his mitt to catch foul balls. Willie McCovey hits a foul, and Harry puts up his mitt in anticipation. Amazingly, the ball falls straight into the cup of beer held between his legs.
Clara's fingers run across his face, around his ears, and through his hair. "Don't make those funny faces," she complains. She mimics him gritting his teeth and sticking out his tongue.
He smiles. "Just testing."
Her hands spread across his chest. "I know massage, you know."
"Yeah," he says.
She crawls under the bag, and he can hear her muffled voice. "I can see in the dark, you know."
"Yeah," he says, "yeah."
Several years later, Harry and five other disabled people in wheelchairs chain themselves to the front gate of the San Diego bus transit yard,
530
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
demanding that the system adapt all buses with wheelchair lifts. The buses and their drivers are stuck in the yard for hours until the police come and disengage the protesters from the tangle of heavy chains and wheelchairs and the chain-link gate. They are all booked and fingerprinted and released. The next day, Harry and others return and chain themselves to the actual bus bumpers.
When Estelle comes to bail Harry out of jail that day, she says, "Harry, have they ever put a person in a wheelchair in jail?"
"Come to think of it, no. I'm the first."
"Finally." Her smile is large. "They wised up."
I HOTEL
531