\976: Ai Hotel
1: Devin & Yuri
Observe how Master Konnyaku, a scrunched and mottled clump of brown and gray fur, licks one of his remaining three paws, rubs its wetness across an empty socket. The fish head's now a neat pile of small bones and translucent scales. A long night of rain breaks, and the wet world framed by your teahouse door drips and breathes with quiet clarity. Sit here on the ledge with your bare toes swinging across the wet tips of grass and weeds, and watch the world wake—drunken snails and worms snatched by morning birds. Light flickers from a dream. Now pick the moonflowers creeping up the trellis, and scribble a poem on a J-Town fan, offered to lovers parted by death.
Devin climbs the ladder to his loft. He's built this structure to gain some space in this tiny room in the I-Hotel. Below, he's got a desk and shelves. Above, his mattress and eight-track cassette system, a necessary wall of music to keep his world insular. In this year, it might be a Witch's Brew. But still the human sounds are invasive. Joe's housing a dingbat prostitute next door to keep the men occupied. The insipid trill of her
I HOTEL
535
throat and the heavy groaning saturate the porous walls. Sometimes the eight-track speakers are not enough, and he grabs his hard penis and pumps it to the rhythms of the squeaking springs and the pounding bed, passes out. Then wakes to the slamming door, sits up high in his loft to greet his flaccid member in a slimy pool, demoralized again. A copy of Kant's Critique of Pure Reason lies open on his chest.
In your teahouse hideout, no Critique, but scattered collectibles perhaps. Junky, Dharma Bums, Gary Snyder, shunga, The Divine Comedy. Then two books discovered at McDonald's bookstore, one by Dick Nagai, the other, Imo Yashima. Asian American porn. Who'da thought. Settle naked side by side. Konnyaku nestles warmly between. Pass a sweet pungent joint. For a laugh, you read Dick; I read Imo.
Devin writes furiously in a thick notebook, writes to Yuri, the girl across the hall.
Yuri, his poems whisper anxiously, tenderly, caressing her name, her shy smile.
Yuri appears, often with an apprehensive look. Hi, she says to Devin as he arrives with the key to his room.
Hi.
Well, she says, see you later.
He watches her leave. He watches her arrive, sometimes with a guy. Always a different guy. A buff movement type who wears his jacket and boots casually like his cool masculinity. Sometimes the guy is there for many days, smell of pot and cigarettes seeping from under the door. Then one day he's gone, and Devin's poetry follows Yuri stumbling from her room, making a weaving path to the corridor bathroom, pours through the shower water, suds and bathes her body, follows every drop of water passing against her gentle curves and crevices and slick black hair.
He appears at his door as she returns, her hair turbaned in a towel. Hi. She looks embarrassed, then annoyed. Her eyes are red from crying, and she turns away. He can hear her sobbing behind the closed door.
Yuri? He knocks.
Go away.
Are you all right?
536
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I'm fine. Go away.
He returns to his loft, settles into A Love Supreme, and writes again to Yuri, always and only to Yuri, his endless and intense feelings penned into page after page. Yuri, he moans, and somehow she appears there sitting in the loft, where they discuss in the minutest detail Loves Body. Freedom is poetry, he tells her. And she replies, Freedom is fire. Yes, yes, he writes it all, their conversation speaking urgently, a battling dialogue pressing extraordinary tension, rising with increasing excitability, breathlessly pressing the pen into and across the skin of her pages.
Konnyaku twirls around in his stuttered three-step and accommodates himself on your bare stomach. Quote passages from Nephew of Nippon, volume i. The protagonist is Dick Katai. Follow him around like a modern-day Genji in prewar L.A., dragging his great katana of a penis from Little Tokyo to Boyle Heights. Meanwhile, I hang out with Imo in the Central Valley, a farm girl siren who entices every migrant worker who ever picked a tomato.
The days grow into weeks into months into a year or two at least. Maybe Yuri has visited with Devin, listened to Miles on his eight-track, shared a couple of chashu bao. She looks at his shelves of books. Did you read all this? Herbert Marcuse. I think I had to read him for a class. I never finished it. I wish I were brainy like you.
Devin feels confused. But, he says. You are really smart. I know you are.
Oh Devin, you're sweet. She smiles wistfully. I've got to go. Study group, she sighs. I never know what they're talking about. Everyone knows I'm stupid. Maybe you can help me one of these days? She fumbles around in her purse, pops something between her teeth, gulps, and licks her lips.
Yeah, sure.
She doesn't invite him to come along, but he wouldn't go anyway. Doesn't he know more than they do? What is he afraid of? The FBI at his door, threatening to take his parents away. Are you or have you ever been a member of the Communist Party?
He watches the door close behind her, but thinks, hasn't he had several conversations with Yuri about advanced industrial societies and technology? He wants to find the entry in his notebook. When she leaves, he
I HOTEL
537
frantically searches through notebook after notebook for the exact passages. All night his mind flips through his past writings, switching about in philosophical eight-tracks. Sleepless.
Sleepless nights follow sleepless nights. Until one dawn, he steps into the corridor and sees Yuri's door left slightly ajar. The door, he senses, is open for a reason, left open for him. Yes, of course. She's been calling him. Yuri? he answers. A lava lamp is the only light, billowing globules rising in changing colors, casting shadows over scattered clothing, dirty dishes, cartons of leftover takeout, empty bottles of beer and cheap wine. The stink of sweat and beer and garlic and sex throbs there. Something grabs his tongue and attacks the nipples on his chest. Yuri? Her sheeted figure appears as a sarcophagus across the bed, her arms folded across her breasts, neatly tucked in. And yet her head hangs twisted to one side, pil- lowed by a book.
She is his muse, but her lips are cold and her body is hard and her mind is frozen.
Dick and Imo are fast reads. Chase the rising tension to the inevitable climax, swapping the balderdash of hard and wet, large and throbbing. Dick performs between lawnmowers and over raw sushi bars. Imo behind tractors and in hot tubs of steaming water. Rub the rural into the urban. Twist Dick into Imo and Imo into Dick. Make the books collide, nisei to nisei, every forbidden act strangled into quietness.
Who wrote this shit?
Bona fide nisei, wouldn't you say?
How do you know?
Turn the page.
Executive Order 9066. Dick and Imo go to camp.
Devin pulls the pillow book from under Yuri's head. She has pasted a cover of soft pink fabric and cushioned her book with felt padding. Within the pages, he reads a compendium of lists. List of friends. List of family. Significant dates. List of addresses where I have lived. List of foods I have eaten. Places visited. Movies. Songs. Bands. Concerts. Colors. Clothing. Books I have read. Books I want to read. Books I should read. Likes. Favorite things. Dislikes. Facial types. Body types. Animals. Dreams. Books. Boyfriends. Boyfriends I have slept with. Names I'd
538
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
rather have. Stupid things I did. Movie stars I love. Things I should like but don't. List of resolutions. List of broken resolutions. Things I hate about myself. More things I hate about myself.
Devin cannot find himself under any list, negative, positive, lukewarm, or nondescript. He replaces the book beneath her head.
Dawning light searches through the blinds for dusty life, smacks his face wet with tears. He grabs her body in his arms, runs from the room, up and down the corridors. Yuri! Yuri! Yuri! Screaming until every door is open and every room is filled with the long wail of his shuddering and horrific grief.
I HOTEL
539