Drive up to the Venice art gallery and unload all of Sesshu's abangyarudo, no doubt rotting and degrading under shellac. Ephemeral is what the gallery copy notes. Sesshu emerges with a wad of cash and hands you half.
What's this for?
For your teahouse.
What teahouse?
Maybe, he shrugs. You never know.
One day, Sesshu sends a postcard from Paris, and about the time Daruma floats away from the pantry, the three-legged, one-eyed Master Konnyaku stumbles in, his big balls dragging around under a crooked tail.
560
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
Hanging out with the poetry boys—-Jack Sung, George Baso, Paul Lin, to name a few—on the roof of the I-Hotel, pass around the Christian Brothers and shout obscenities at the moon, you bunch of howling gangster coyotes dropping your pants to moon the moon, rising to exchange the sun's dying horizon. That's when the women catch you with your pants down, and you got to zipper/button up and return to being cool. Record the historic moment up on the roof of the I-Hotel when Jack, George, Paul, and you step forward to meet Sandy Hu, her Lady Murasaki, Clio, and me. Gust of wind flying through our hair, whipping up flared pants over worn boots, zipping around tank tops, rhinestones, and lavender leather. Sun down, moon rising. Make no mistake about it.
Abra's late but makes the second set, waves from the back of the bar, trying to catch Clio's eye. Even if Clio's seen Abra through the stage lights, she's ignoring her, trying to forget her earlier disappointment, working at the intricacies of the strings buzzing beneath her fingers, forcing her instrument to moan and wail. The rasping charge from the guitar reaches to the back of that dark underworld, and Abra feels it stab her in the gut, taunting and cruel.
At the table, Abra swivels the ice in her Coke, watches Clio take her time before taking a seat. Abra leans over for a kiss, but Clio pulls away, orders something hard on the rocks.
Abra's contrite. Meeting went longer. Then I had to mimeo flyers, distribute them. We've got a court date coming up, then a rally. Sorry. Who were you talking to?
New drummer. Vicki's replacement.
Oh? Where were you last night?
Practice.
I waited.
I thought you had a meeting.
I went over to your place. You weren't there either.
Band had to discuss things. Looks like we have a gig in L.A.
I HOTEL
Why does the drummer keep looking this way?
How are the kids?
Sleeping.
Who's watching?
They shouldn't wake up.
Shit can happen. Youd better go.
I will. Just give me some time.
Look, Abra, it's not working out.
You promised. We promised. We can't let things get between us.
Things? You mean kids? You mean meetings? You mean politics? Does your collective approve of me? Do they even know about me?
I haven't asked you to join.
This L.A. thing is important to me. We might a get a record deal out of it.
They're just using you.
Who?
Those white girls. You're the only one with real talent.
Maybe I'm using them.
Didn't you tell the drummer about me?
What's there to tell?
Up on the roof, share the Christian Brothers with the poetry sisters, who oblige you with a small sample of their work. Listen to Clio's lyrics for a song about a hound-dog daddy who abuses and rapes her, about that daddy getting what's coming to him. If Clio could hook up her guitar and a mic, she'd blast the message into every tong association in Chinatown, every strip bar in the North Beach, every men's room in every office building in the financial district. Huddle under that rising moon, quiet and contemplative after Clio's emotional rendition, but the poetry brothers are already pretty drunk, and therefore giddy, stupid, and insensitive.
Well, I'd say as a rock song, it works for shock value, but I don't do rock. I'm more a jazz man myself.
It's not really a poem. It's a song.
Now let's be honest. Do all women have this imagination of their fathers doing it to them? What do you call it? Electra complex?
562
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
That Freudian shit is for white people.
Shit, what's this saying about Asian men? That's what I wanna know.
Why you wanna make us out to be assholes? When're you gonna give us a break?
When we write poetry, we write about how we love you.
Finally we stand up to the white man, and you blame us for your bound feet.
You fucking pigs! Clio yells and runs from the rooftop, poetry sisters all close behind.
Where're they going?
Just having a constructive conversation.
Thought she wanted my opinion.
Actually, I liked it.
Abra cradles Clio's lovely head.
Before I leave, Clio says, one more time.
Wild girl, grab me till I'm sore.
One more time, cherry bomb.
Bodies soft and smooth, but every movement hides a muscular and brutal edge, a slow tearing away, kneading out every hurt and unkindness, accusing hands grabbing and scraping, greedy to feel the ending, the long relentless twang holding out for as long as possible. Never stop. Make this feeling eternal. Make my hurt in hurt complete.
And yes, the flowing landscape of breast and hip matches buttocks and nape. And yes, the tongue burns with the salty slime of lemon peel, acidic and bitter. And yes, wet centers meet, aching and tender, dark iris to dark iris. And yes, fingers and palms play the body, one string, one nervous lip, one tense nipple at a time, then two, then multiple lips and nipples, fluttering, keying the melody and the deep bass all at once. Ordinary hands seen in the light of day, working hands—writing, typing, cooking, gesturing hands—now darkly languid yet urgent, pressing, slipping, spreading and knuckled, a secret talent, a secret eros. Praying, preying hands, lifting belly in a bittersweet sea.
Lean over the edge of the roof of the I-Hotel and see the dark figures of the poetry sisters charging down Kearny, a twinkle of poetry dust sparkling in their wake. Shout drunkenly, Asian sisters! Come back! We
I  HOTEL
563
love you! Your idiotic cries roll off into the warmest night of that San Francisco summer.
And rising above the sweet lapping of the bay, you think the moon is a moon, but it is not. It's a blushing jellyfish alive in a cobalt sea, a belly-fish lifting, a great pulsing womb sucking, it's tentacles following, burning the hand that enters, entangling about the fingers, drawing them upward, plunging, tactile sensations traveling, the knowing shudder of the inner heart, the jelly's cruel, spasmed grip, sputter of white ink.
564
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
6: Bard & Huo Lian
Imagine the commotion on Columbus under the awning at City Lights, excited public primping for an imagined paparazzi, poet literati emerging from the netherworld of our pacific Barbary, scratching forty-eight-hour beards, replacing lipstick gloss, pupils punched from black confetti. The night is yours, name aglow in City Lights, published book of collected poems displayed prominently in the window, and, appearing tonight, reading and book signing by you, the author.
Where the fuck is he?
Paul, the editor, is pacing around nervously, wondering if someone's finally killed you off for your innocence. Arthur is the paparazzi, moving through the crowd and flashing photos of your historic moment. Hiro is uncorking, pouring, and drinking the wine, and about an hour into the scheduled event, George raises his glass, proposes a toast, and proceeds to read all your poems, starting on page one.
Make love, not war. What does this really mean?
It happens during rehearsal, Huo Lian playing the Japanese prostitute who's fallen in love with the young clerk, played by Bard. They've modernized the old eighteenth-century Chikamatsu play originally written for Bunraku puppet theatre, kept the Japanese costuming and the powdered faces but with a tattered, Brechtian edge. Separated by greed and the social desires of others, the star-crossed lovers find no recourse except the promise of life together in death. It begins in the scene where Bard is hidden under Huo Lian's robes, touching her feet tucked beneath her buttocks, and travels to the last scenes of michiyuki when their bodies gasp together in the final throes of passion.
I flubbed the last lines, Bard apologizes.
We just need more time, Huo Lian answers.
Maybe if I come over to your place.
Yes, you'd better. Only a few days to opening.
I have a confession to make. I flubbed my lines because—
I HOTEL
565