Before there was ever a teahouse, there was Daruma living in the pantry. Walk in one day to grab a can of tomato soup, and he's sitting there on the floor, sitting cross-legged in monk's robes, large round bald head, messy beard around his chin, and two bushy white rabbit-tail brows patched above each eye. One eye opens like a searchlight and looks around.
Stumble away in shock and drop the can on your own foot. Ow! Goddamn fuck!
Now both eyes open, and his whole body shakes with laughter.
Who are you? Who let you in? What are you doing here?
He stops laughing and seems to think about this, then grunts and breathes deeply, returns to a stoned pose.
Back away to think about this situation, closing the pantry door momentarily and reopening it to check, just to check. Open the can of soup, add water, and heat to a simmer. Check the pantry again. Divide the soup into two bowls, and put one bowl with a spoon inside the pantry door. Leave the house and walk around J-Town for a couple of hours trying to sort things out. Go into all the temples, and ask if they're not missing a certain monk with bushy eyebrows. Return to find the empty bowl with the soupspoon placed outside the pantry door. Worry about this situation for about a week, then give up.
Couple weeks later, George comes around with a friend. This is Sesshu, he introduces him. He's an artist from Japan. He needs a place to stay so I said he could stay with you.
No way. I already got a monk in my pantry. See?
George and Sesshu look inside the pantry. No shit.
Sesshu says, Shit.
Monk says, Shit.
Sesshu sits down in the pantry with the monk and nods. It's very good.
George, no way he's going to stay.
It's very good.
552
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
George shrugs. Sit at the kitchen table and pull at your hair, pull your glasses off and rub your eyes, slap your face and pull at your cheeks, replace your glasses and refocus. George is still there. He's at the pantry door listening to Sesshu and the monk, whose conversation sounds like grunts and jabs, low staccato and hissing, then haah haah haah haaaaaahhh. He looks over and says, They're talking some heavy shit, heavy, heavy shit.
In a prison cell in Soledad, California, Stony composes a letter to Aiko.
Dear Aiko, angel of my recovery,
I received your last letter dated January 8 and have read it again and again, every chance I get. That's true about all your letters, and I have my favorite letters already. I've even memorized parts of them and carry your words in my mind constantly. Especially your descriptions of traveling in North Vietnam and meeting those righteous people fighting for their liberation.
I have drawn a small calendar, and I am crossing out every day until my parole. I promise you that first thing, Tm headed out to L.A. to see you. I admit I'm a little nervous about meeting you in person for the first time, but maybe it had to be this way, having this time in the joint to reflect and the sweet miracle of knowing you through your letters. I am reading and studying up, doing my push-ups daily, preparing to be there, fighting at your side.
Your yellow brother in revolution, Stony
Now there are two Japanese living in the pantry. Wonder how many Japanese can fit in one pantry. It's like this, says George, Japan's an island with no more space. Comparatively, your pantry's a mansion.
It can't be the poorly stocked pantry unless the bare shelves inspire hunger, but Sesshu emerges cooking Japanese cuisine—udon in clear fish stock, mushroom buttons and dried minnows in miso, raw tuna dipped in wasabi and shoyu, salted napa and daikon, blocks of tofu spattered with grated ginger, giants bowls of hot steamed rice. Wash everything down with green tea.
I HOTEL
553
Now, Sesshu announces, we go out.
Now? It's past midnight.
In Japan, it's tomorrow.
Head out to Post Street escorted by two Japanese, a young skinny artist-type with a stringy goatee squeaking forward in slip-on Keds and an old monk in dark robes, the clatter of his geta on cold cement bouncing back and forth across the dark empty streets lined with sooty Victorians. Slip into a bar, but the bartender's already announcing last call. What'll it be?
Sesshu says, Jack Daniels.
Monk adds, Rocks.
Notice your friend Kats nursing a final scotch, and introduce Sesshu and Daruma to a J-Town local. Kats's family owns the fish store over there on Post.
Fish? Sesshu lights up. I need fish. My art, he points to his nose, fish.
How about it, Kats? This place is closing up. Let's take them over to see your fish.
Heard Miles Davis is in town.
Most likely end up at Jimbo's after hours.
Most likely.
Kats opens up the dark store, shows Sesshu the fridge with the giant fish, then opens up the back storage, and if the sound of a horn was distant at first, now Bop City's wailing through the back wall. Kats pulls away some boxes smelling of dried bonita and toasted rice, reveals a loose board, pulls that away, crouches low, and sneaks through. Follow him in to where he's got some crates snug in the cold packed earth, covered tubs of curing pickles, ikura, and kasu, and take a seat for the jazz concert of your life, not first-row seats but under the stage itself. Sense the weight of the man above, his feet keeping rhythms in the creak of the old wood punching down onto your head, the energy of blowing reaching down into the ground rising between your feet, through your crotch, and rushing between your eyes and out your brain like a blowhole into his blowhole. It's too much for a man to take. Trade seats with Daruma, and watch his eyes pop and his eyebrows catch fire. Far fucking out.
Settle into the sweet stink of jazz and seaweed and fish, and pass around a bottle of sake for the next couple of hours until Kats says, Time to get outta here before they bring in the morning produce.
554
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
Follow Kats out through the narrow aisles stacked with sembei, nori, and canned takenoko, and once outside, nod to scattered couples leaving Jimbo's next door. Hey, where's Daruma? The monk's been left behind. Think momentarily he'll be happier in the fish market, but Sesshu returns to fetch his roommate, running back into the dark store then back again to report. Sesshu's eyes are wide with glee. He says, Come look! We find great treasure!
Return to the back of the store to find Daruma pulling books out of the trash and stashing copies in his robes. Kats looks at the heap. The titles are all in Japanese. My sister's doing spring cleaning. Must be tossing this stuff. Used to be my dad's, but nobody's reading it now.
So, says Sesshu excitedly, we can take! He looks around. There are more in boxes stacked everywhere. Must rescue books, Sesshu announces with determination. He picks up a box and shoves it into your empty arms. Follow your crew huffing under heavy boxes filled with kanji, pantry reading material you guess, turning up Buchanan in single file. Turn back to catch a glimpse of Miles and his entourage, swinging their horn cases, moving slowly away down Post.
One day, Stony walks out the gate at Soledad, heads away from his past: slicked-back hair and toe-pointed shoes, running the J-Flats with the Baby Black Juans, dropping acid weekly and smoking pot daily. Time to leave all that behind, clean up his act, join forces with the people. Time to find his revolutionary woman. Time to meet Aiko.
Sesshu and Daruma are busy turning the pantry into a library, substituting the Campbell's soup system for some kind of Japanese Dewey decimal. Sesshu's pointing and Daruma intones like it's a sumo match: Hokusai. Utamaro. Eisen. Kuniyoshi. Kunisada. Shuncho. Hiroshige.
You got richest collection in all of Japantown. Maybe don't have this even in Japan. Stolen by American missionaries. Bombs away. Can you believe it? Sesshu grabs you like you need to be woken up. Greatest art of the Edo! Floating world, but, he spits out his skinny chest to emphasize, better yet, shunga!
Shunga?
He snatches a volume from the shelf, stab-bound at one end by thread. This, he says, enpon. He searches for an appropriate translation. Ancient
I HOTEL
555
Japanese-style Playboy. Here, he opens to a page, spreads smooth the colorful block print on yellowing rice paper, ornate Japanese couple in swooping hair with dazzling combs, flowing layers of silken robes in patterned details, falling away to indiscreetly reveal the conjoining of the largest genitalia you have ever seen.
Holy shit! Cockeyed thoughts rattle your brain.
Sesshu asks, How do you think?
Big. You gesture for comedy.
You don't believe?
Daruma steps forward, parts his robes, and reveals his tremendous equipment.
Nod with honored appreciation.
Daruma points to another page and mutters something to Sesshu.
He says, this position extremely difficult.
Turn your head to ascertain how the bodies could twist around each other, the legs bent in opposite directions, but the penis making its appropriate entry.
Don't try this unless you are expert.
Daruma grunts seriously, points to his nose, and grins.
Now, Sesshu pronounces, I find my inspiration/You?
I find I'm horny.
Horny?
You know.
That's why you gonna write poetry. I do art. Women come very curious about poetry. Curious about art. Poetry, art, eventually, shunga.
What kind of art do you do?
Abangyarudo.
Go with Sesshu to Kats's fish market and get the fish for Sesshu's abangyarudo art. Sesshu turns the house into a workshop, slicing fish, slapping and gluing it with leaves and dead branches from the backyard onto canvases, and painting it all over with thick wild swatches of color, shellacking everything into shiny, hard, three-dimensional surfaces. Voila!
Beautiful, you say, looking at fish preserved in variously rotting stages.
No ugly. Ugly. That's beautiful.
When he's got about twenty abangyarudos, he says, Now we go to Venice, open exhibition, sell everything. You got a car? I show you the way.
556
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
Venice?
He gets a map of California out and points to Los Angeles.
Fill up Macario's old station wagon with twenty abangyarudos with. two crazy-assed Japanese, Daruma chanting scriptures, seventy miles per hour all the way down 101. Then, somewhere near Soledad, pick up an Asian cat with a paper bag of his belongings, on the highway, thumb pointing south.
Stony, where you headed?
L.A.
Mind if we take a slight detour?
Sequoias, says Sesshu, pointing to the map. Turn left.
Stony joins Daruma in the backseat, surprises the monk with his fine Japanese. Hey, Daruma says in Japanese. Why does he make sense?
He's speaking Japanese, says Sesshu.
Ah!
Pretty soon Stony and Daruma must be talking heavy shit. Talk enlightenment through Fresno and on east into the Sierras, right up to the redwood groves covered in a thick blanket of snow. Suddenly jump out of the car and chase now three crazy-assed yelping Japanese into the snow. Rub crotches against the giant sequoias for energy and longevity. Spin snowballs to hit the upper branches of one sequoia, dislodging a snow pack over Daruma peeing freely into the crisp air. Pass around the shochu, and pack snow into dharma statues. Find an empty cabin and sit around the potbelly stove, drinking tea and shochu, eating Sesshu's riceballs and pickles, talking more enlightenment.
Sesshu says to you, Read a poem.
Wait, says Daruma, and pulls out a piece of bamboo from the folds of his robes. Yokobue, he says and hands it to Stony. Play.
Stony looks at the bamboo flute, confused.
First time easy, Daruma says. Play yokobue with poem, he commands.
You read. Stony blows.
Heavy shit, nods Sesshu.
Heavy, says Stony.
Shit, says Daruma.
Sesshu says, Stony, you Asian American yakuza, that's right.
Everyone agrees, and Daruma produces another bottle of shochu.
I HOTEL
557
Sesshu continues, Stony, we got a job for you. You gonna kill dharma bums, Ginsberg first, then Snyder. Then, Sesshu points at you, he's gonna be number one Asian American poet. Daruma grunts agreement. Stony says, Nah, I'm on parole.
Oh, too bad. Sesshu pauses. Just you remember. His voice slurs and rolls around the cabin, kisses the belly of the fire. What? I forget.
Stony knocks on Aiko's door.
She's wearing a Mao jacket and cap and holding a shotgun extended across the back of her neck. Behind her the speaker system swells with orchestral strings, traditional zithers, triumphant horns, rolling cymbals, and the marching drums of the Red Detachment of Women. Stony could swear the whole room is glowing and pulsing red, that the entire cherubic yellow nation is welcoming him home. His chest pounds with the pride of eight hundred million people. You're late, she says. Never too late for the revolution.
She smiles and turns. Of course she's barefoot, and he follows her jaunty step, watches her pull the shotgun to her shoulder, focus on an unseen target, practice her stance. She cocks the twelve-gauge, click clack, and gently pushes it under the bed.
She tugs at his jacket, packed with her letters stuffed into every pocket, the most precious held next to his heart. She pulls them out and reads one or two, hands grazing his pounding chest, glancing at his lips that read back the parts he's memorized. His eyes fill with tears and longing. Once a revolutionary, his lips form the words.
Her fingers find his lips, circle and touch his teeth, Now a comrade. She pushes her hands into the warmth of his jacket, padded thickly with all its paper, stamps, penned confessions. Everything has been said.
He pulls away her cap, her lustrous hair falling, pops open one by one the frog ties of her Mao jacket. Beneath, he's surprised to discover she's clothed in a second layer, a thin silk red pajama. Her revolutionary cast of accompanying dancers fly by with red ribbons, and she smiles. This begins in stages, touching through the scarlet layers, reaching within,
558
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
feeling, exchanging soft, then wetter, kisses. Chu chu. Pa pa. Uun uun.
Time to put the shunga and its big promises on the bed. Twelve pages of twelve months turning fragrant pine over pristine snow to fluttering, fading cherry blossoms to erect murasaki irises to plump yellow chrysanthemums and crimson maples. Detachment's red thunder fills the room in powerful splendor, a symphony in four movements. Bodies roll and twist and turn, impossible contortions, grow dizzy with the visions of postered faces plastered to every wall: Mao to Marx to Ho to Lumumba to Lenin to Fidel to Malcolm to Che, zapping around and around, all the revolutionary men hard with anticipation.
Ha ha, fu fu, breathless
Little revolutionary sister
Movement man
Nicha wet and nicha sticky
Gusu wet and gusu rubbing
Slow nururi wet and slipping
Ha ha, uun uun uun
Zuppo sucking
Splashy piccha
Your love waters
Uh, uh, ah ah, uh uh
Ahhahh
Aahh
Sloshing zupo zupo sloshing
Slippery nuru nuru slippery
Stand tokki tokki erect
Go deeply
Dig me there
Bicha bicha wet and bicha bicha slapping
Faster faster
Deeper deeper
Twitching biko biko muscles
Uun uun, ahh ahh ahh
Byokku byokku
Byokku byokku
I HOTEL
559
Drive up to the Venice art gallery and unload all of Sesshu's abangyarudo, no doubt rotting and degrading under shellac. Ephemeral is what the gallery copy notes. Sesshu emerges with a wad of cash and hands you half.
What's this for?
For your teahouse.
What teahouse?
Maybe, he shrugs. You never know.
One day, Sesshu sends a postcard from Paris, and about the time Daruma floats away from the pantry, the three-legged, one-eyed Master Konnyaku stumbles in, his big balls dragging around under a crooked tail.
560
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
Hanging out with the poetry boys—-Jack Sung, George Baso, Paul Lin, to name a few—on the roof of the I-Hotel, pass around the Christian Brothers and shout obscenities at the moon, you bunch of howling gangster coyotes dropping your pants to moon the moon, rising to exchange the sun's dying horizon. That's when the women catch you with your pants down, and you got to zipper/button up and return to being cool. Record the historic moment up on the roof of the I-Hotel when Jack, George, Paul, and you step forward to meet Sandy Hu, her Lady Murasaki, Clio, and me. Gust of wind flying through our hair, whipping up flared pants over worn boots, zipping around tank tops, rhinestones, and lavender leather. Sun down, moon rising. Make no mistake about it.
Abra's late but makes the second set, waves from the back of the bar, trying to catch Clio's eye. Even if Clio's seen Abra through the stage lights, she's ignoring her, trying to forget her earlier disappointment, working at the intricacies of the strings buzzing beneath her fingers, forcing her instrument to moan and wail. The rasping charge from the guitar reaches to the back of that dark underworld, and Abra feels it stab her in the gut, taunting and cruel.
At the table, Abra swivels the ice in her Coke, watches Clio take her time before taking a seat. Abra leans over for a kiss, but Clio pulls away, orders something hard on the rocks.
Abra's contrite. Meeting went longer. Then I had to mimeo flyers, distribute them. We've got a court date coming up, then a rally. Sorry. Who were you talking to?
New drummer. Vicki's replacement.
Oh? Where were you last night?
Practice.
I waited.
I thought you had a meeting.
I went over to your place. You weren't there either.
Band had to discuss things. Looks like we have a gig in L.A.
I HOTEL