dissolution. The clatter of wooden clappers and the frenzied stammer of the shamisen announce their descent into hell. Tokubei binds Ohatsu to the emblematic pine and palm growing from a single trunk and strikes his knife, recklessly hysterical, slices at her tender throat and then his own, and in the dark wings, Bard and Huo Lian die their ecstatic slaying again and again. You are mine alone, forever, and it will never be like this again.
Return late from the Delta to the I-Hotel with two tired old manongs and forty-six inches and twenty pounds of prehistoric sturgeon caught with ghost shrimp on a two-inch hook off a rental boat near the Dump Gate across from Vieira's Resort.
Shit, you say as you push back the door of the teahouse and Konnyaku jumps at your fishy body. You knew there was something else you were supposed to be doing tonight.
57°
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
7: Renee & Ken
Hiro's horn-rimmed glasses, framed by a scraggy bush of graying hair and stringy beard, appear in the door of your bookstore. Hey, he says. You back?
Oh, yeah.
Where you been?
Kyushu.
How about the Philippines? You go there?
No. Why not?
I go there, they'll say I'm not from there. I don't have to go where I'm from but never been, right?
And they say I don't make sense. Hiro flips through your sparse merchandise on makeshift shelves. What were you thinking when you opened this place?
At the time, seemed like a good idea.
Shoulda got yourself arrested like me for selling indecency. What is this place but a funky Edo porn shop?
Oh no, these are all ancient instructional manuals.
Hiro chuckles, You came home in time. They're gonna ram their balls through that wall any day now. I was thinking I was going to have to break in to save your shunga and shit all by myself.
One more time, you and Hiro haul the shunga out of your defunct bookstore back to the floating pantry. Take the sign down that says USED RARE OUT-OF-PRINT BOOKS and turn the CLOSED sign around in the window forever.
Take a pot of rice, bottle of Coke, couple raw eggs, and a bowl of this slimy stuff Hiro calls natto down to the teahouse. You stick to rice and tea, but Hiro whips up the raw eggs and natto with shoyu in his bowl of rice and digs in, swapping the rice goop with swigs of Coke. You didn't eat this in Kyushu? he asks. He puts a glob of it in Konnyaku's bowl. See, he likes it.
I HOTEL
571
He's Japanese.
Maybe you're Japanese too.
Coming back next time as a cat.
You believe in reincarnation?
Who knows?
Maybe death is easier if you get to come back.
I thought the thing is you got to find a way not to come back. Get to nirvana and leave the earth behind.
Yeah, but maybe you got some unfinished business.
Konnyaku's got some unfinished business. Look at what's left of the ugly cat—half a tail, one eye, three legs, patches of hair here and there.
I think his business is finished. Hiro pours your tea into what's left of the brown egg slime at the bottom of his bowl and chugs it down. I been reading this Tale of Kieu, call it the epic poem of the Vietnamese nation. Read the national tale and know why they could fight the Chinese, the French, the Japanese, and the Americans for two thousand years and finally win.
Reincarnation?
Unfinished business.
Ken walks out of Boalt Hall in a paisley shirt, khakis, gold suede shoes, and with a law degree to boot, then passes the California bar and founds the Asian Law Caucus. Up to and in between, there's showing up at the first class, then pot, acid, mescaline, and hanging out at the beach making blue, green, and purple sand candles, paying for the biker upstairs to bike to L.A. to buy a brick, divvying up the brick into baggies and lids and sending the whole mess back to a contact at the UCLA library for general sales to support life back in Berkeley and pay for law school, and showing up at the last class and acing all the exams. And wedged in between all that, there's draft counseling in J-Town and Chinatown and the I-Hotel, strategizing evasive tactics to avoid the draft, getting the paperwork lost in the draft boards, analyzing the lottery numbers, 1 to 146 most likely to go, writing testimonies toward the sanctity of life, putting blood in a stool test to get signed off for colitis, guzzling a quart of soy sauce to push up the blood pressure, pink panties to get fag status, peanut butter up the ass for the anal exam so when the doctor inspects and says, What's this? you scrape it off your crack, lick it from your fingers, and say,
572
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
Shit? And beyond that, there's pro-bono work on behalf of every radical left formation liberating material from the dirty capitalists, advocating for their right to chain themselves to public property.
Then, one day, Ken meets Renee.
He says, You know, you really look familiar, like a girl I once knew.
Oh?
Yeah, her name was Yuri.
You goddamn fucker, you! Renee flings herself forward, punching his face and grabbing his necktie to choke him.
What the fuck! He grabs her hands and pushes her backward, but her feet come forward kicking. He's got to grab all her parts and twist her arms back, and she's still struggling. Are you crazy?
You're the one! You killed my sister! Drugged her up and left her to die!
What are you talking about?
How many of you are there? You fuckers!
Calm down. Calm down. You got the wrong person.
Do you know old she was? Not even twenty. How could you? How could you?
Listen to me! It wasn't me. It wasn't me.
Renee's body sinks into sobs.
I'm sorry. I'm sorry.
Hand Hiro another Coke and settle in to listen to his rendition of the Tale of Kieu. Kieu, who is beautiful and talented, falls in love with Kim, promising to marry him, but to save her family from slavery, sells herself to another man who sells her into prostitution, leading to servitude, slavery, other marriages, the nunnery, and finally back to Kim. Up to and in between, her sister Van marries Kim in her place, and Kieu, now a prostitute and later a slave and concubine, attempts suicide and fails, marries again but as the second wife becomes a slave to the first, then marries a general but accidentally betrays him, causing him to be defeated in battle, is ordered to marry again, attempts suicide and fails again, finally escapes into a life of religious meditation, however finally marrying her first love, Kim, becoming his second but platonic wife. Wedged in between all that, Kieu discovers that, though a vision of human perfection, she's the incarnation of a previous existence of passion and loss, and
I HOTEL
573
the more she fights her karma, the greater and more bitter her failure. Beyond that, she's a woman in a man's world, but with four marriages, first- and second-wife status, rape, prostitution, and a stint of concubi-neship, the good news is no kids. That's the long and the short of it, says Hiro.
National epic, you nod. I don't get it.
I think it's like this. You keep coming back to fight, fight cruelty and injustice, and maybe you never win, and if you get lucky, you figure it all out before you die and before they put you in a rest home.
When you're just a kid like Kieu with your whole life ahead of you, how you supposed to know?
It's the shit they never tell you.
Renee emerges an average student from a low-end but middle-class family background in a suburban San Jose neighborhood in the postwar fifties, gradually gets drawn into civil rights and radical left politics, becomes an active Asian American movement radical, joining a new left communist group from which she is eventually purged, then marries a movement attorney. Up to and in between, she has a long-term relationship with a fellow traveler, associates with radical Third World feminism, marries the fellow traveler to solidify their political comradeship as directed by party leaders, but agrees not to have children, is followed into political activities by her sister Yuri who, unable to overcome severe depression and personal insecurities, becomes lost to drug addiction and casual sex, dying in an overdose; meanwhile, Renee looks to support from the party only to be purged for her suspicion that some of the members have slept with her sister, divorces her cadre husband, enters a long period of psychological therapy and bitter soul searching. Beyond that, she earns a masters in sociology at San Jose State while working a full-time job with the county.
Ken draws Renee closer.
I don't know if I can, she says.
It's been a month. Come on.
Two miscarriages. That's all I can think about.
Stop thinking so much.
Like I'm setting us up for failure.
574
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
Maybe we've got to stop trying so hard. If it happens, it happens. Do you think? What? I'm too old. Don't say that.
I lost my chance. I wanted this so much, just to make this life happen inside me, and now I can't. It's too late. Come on. I can't feel anything. I just can't.
Go to the hospital to see Hiro lying there in icu with tubes up his nose, serum dripping into his veins. Stand next to Ken and Renee who take turns sleeping in the room all night, looking haggard, red eyes, unshaven.
Uncle Hiro had a stroke, says Ken.
Happened in the basement at City Lights, says Renee.
Sometimes he seems to wake up, but I don't know if he can hear. .   I brought him this bottle of Coke, you say.
Thanks.
Return to the teahouse, and sit in the dark with Master Konnyaku, watching the fog hunt through the grass and tall weeds, creep silently under the house. Think about Hiro and a conversation about Thich Quang Due, the sixty-seven-year-old monk who, in 1963 on a busy Saigon intersection, sat in the lotus position, smothered in gasoline, and lit himself afire. Hiro hands you a book; he's always handing you some book. Vietnam: Lotus in a Sea of Fire. As Americans, maybe we can never understand this, he says. Full engagement with life. An act of sacrifice to open the heart to love.
I HOTEL
575