Set your tape recorder on the table with bananas and fish. Press PLAY/REC. Rolling.
Manong, you got a story to tell?
I got plenty. Whatchu wanna know?
Any story you got to tell. We gonna record you for posterity.
Ha! You sitting on your posterity!
Laugh while manong reaches for the fish and slowly picks it clean from the bone. He nods and eats. Pulls apart more fish, working meticulously, tail to head, leaving the best for last, licking his fingers, licking his lips. Not bad. You cook this yourself? If Master Konnyaku could speak, this is what he might say.
Thus move from manong to manong with tape recorder, bananas, and fish, recording posterity captured in the dark filaments of spinning ribbon. Collect the audio cassettes in piles and stacks, hour by hour into hundreds of hours, a rising clutter displacing the graceful serenity of the tokonoma, Konnyaku's clumsy stalking toppling everything, golden locks of precious ribbon caught in his stubborn claws. Arrive to find him tangled in tape spaghetti, charging around with no escape, one hysterical one-eyed cat, looking like the wedding car, flying nuptials, trailing streamers and empty cans. Chase him in circles and into the garden. Konnyaku! Konnyaku! Until finally the stuff is extricated, tossed into the irises.
Sit quietly with Konnyaku, smoothing back his patchy fur, calming his racing heart. Contemplate voices lost to posterity, the eternal presence of the past captured in a wadded brain of plastic tape.
Manong Virgilio steps out into the corridor and catches Devin, holding Devin holding Yuri, holding both into silence, speaking incantations in Tagalog mixed with dialect as if Devin must naturally comprehend. Virgilio speaks quietly, continually, loosening Yuri from Devin's crazed grip and heaving sadness, extracting her body, a naked doll from a child's arms, carries her away.
Take heart that despite Konnyaku's taped turmoil, hundreds of manong hours still remain. Press PLAY and settle back to listen.
What's that?
Turn up the volume.
Hear that? Manong's eating. Chewing, chewing. Now what?
So, manong, when did you come to America?
Long time ago. Chewing, chewing.
When was that?.
Back then. Chewing, chewing.
Hmmm.
Dessert time. Peeling the banana.
Listen to long hours of chewing, chewing, clinking dishes, smacking lips, gulping beer, burping, burping, grunting. Fall asleep, then awake again to the same. Chewing, grunting, smacking, burping. Not bad. You cook this yourself?
You think it's got to come naturally, but only eating comes naturally. Talking manongs may not be your project. Pass this on to another poet.
Devin knocks at Virgilio's door.
Virgilio, you there?
Yeah.
You got time for an interview? Devin holds the tape recorder up for Virgilio to see. It's your turn. Are you ready to talk?
Oh, Devin, you back? Where you been?
Langley, you know. I went crazy there for a while.
I know. Happens to the best of us. You come back O.K.
Yeah.
You can still hear those voices?
No.
Voices are not so bad. Keep you company. But, one time I'm hearing her voice. But she's not there. Not anywhere. Can't be, but it's her voice. So I follow it.
Whose voice?
Momo. My beautiful peach girl. A long time ago I know her. I'm working for her father out there Central Valley way. It's a good job. He's got peaches, apricots. Other vegetables too. I'm doing all the work. But how
540
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
541
can you only work and not see Momo? I'm seeing Momo, and my heart is melting. How can a heart love so much? I never felt this way before. And Momo is seeing me, and you think it can't happen, this love at first sight. For Momo and me, this is how it happens, and I never know so much happiness and so much loving. Once you feel this, you get the feeling of sadness because how can you keep the happiness? So we go crazy for each other and think maybe we will run away. But what kind of job I got, going from place to place, picking fruit? And her folks got plans for her, sending her to Japan to get an education and a Japanese husband. It's all planned out. But we are making love all the time, every opportunity. We cannot stop. Every secret place. Back of a truck. In the ditch. Up in the trees. Between the crates. Under the house. Sometimes morning. Sometimes middle of the day. Every night. How can we stop? Like two magnets. My mind doesn't work. Only my body, like I can't breathe, my heart busting out of my pants. And that's the way it is every day for days and days, like a marathon we never stop, and maybe I should know she's pregnant, got the rise in her belly, but I'm loving her even more, even when we know what we got is impossible, the more impossible, the more we need what we can't have, the more we got to make this loving, crying together, crying so much we mixing salty with sweet with bitter, like trying to scratch a way inside to some place where we stay together forever. You gonna run your machine or what?
Oh. This is your story?
Coming up best part. So one day I'm coming to meet her in a hideaway spot in the garage, and I don't know why I never think this has to end even though she's crying all the time and I'm licking away her tears and telling her we gonna escape and go away and never stop this loving. And so—
Virgilio?
Been a while, but the pain is the same.
Get your junior poets going off in every direction with separate tape recorders doing what the professors call an oral history project, collecting manong voices, history from the people who lived it. The audiocas-sette pile grows even larger, but Konnyaku avoids it now. Listen to all these new tapes. No more chewing-chewing, but new developments. Manongs talking pidgin. Manongs talking dialect. Seven hundred islands
542
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
of seven hundred dialects, mixing it all up, speaking in authentic manong voices. What are they saying?
How the hell we know?
We lost control of the project.
They been taking the tape recorder and passing it around. Say we mess them up with too many questions.
They say, we can do it ourselves. When they remember, they say, just press PLAY/REC. Easy.
Devin waits. Virgilio's breath stutters up, holding tightly to the old pain. They stare a long time at the double twirling wheels in the plastic window of the tape recorder, concentrating on the recording machine, waiting.
Virgilio breathes in deep. So then I think Momo's joking with me. How's her feet dangling there? I got to climb up and cut the rope. I got to get her down. I got to get her neck straight. I got to make her speak to me. I got to hold her in my arms. I got to make her breathe. I got to feel her breathing on my neck. Got to taste her lips. Touch her breast. Touch all her spots. Touch where she's got the baby. No. No. No. How could she do this? How? How could she leave me behind like this? You know?
Bring the professors to the teahouse for tea. Stir it up and make them comfortable on cushions and at peace with nature, then press PLAY and make them listen to hours and hours of manong voices, seven hundred dialects from seven hundred islands. Who's going to transcribe all this? Who knows what they are saying? How is this different from chewing-chewing?
Invaluable documentation.
You got the right idea because these guys are dropping dead every day. Time's a factor here.
I think I know a guy in linguistics connected to Pacific Island studies.
Maybe there is someone at Manila University.
We need to get a grant. This will take time and money.
I'm on sabbatical this year. I can't take this on for another two years.
This is seminal work.
Seminal.
I HOTEL
543
Devin and Virgilio cry. Sob into the microphone.
Maybe we should stop.
No. I got to tell you this. I got to take you back there. So like I started to tell you, I'm hearing her voice. I can't stop hearing her voice. So I follow her voice, and maybe I'm following her voice for many days, I don't know how long, going this way and that, never stopping, and her voice takes me there.
Where?
To where she is. Who knows, but I go there, maybe to hell, to the dead world, and then I see my Momo there like a dream, her beautiful face, her young body, everything glowing, I see her. I swear to you, I see her. And don't you know, I do everything just the way they tell you you gotta do it. You got to walk away and never look back, so that's the way she follows you out of the dead world, back to the living world, but Devin, this is what you need to know, what I didn't know when my Momo called to me: the dead cannot come back. They stay dead forever, and that's the truth, so even though she's calling to you and you follow her voice to the dead world, you got to look back and see the truth. Light a fire, and look back. You got that choice.
But what did you do?
I never look back.
But—
Can't you see? Behind me? Momo's always there following me, following me until this day, following me, now this old man, forever. She's always there, but never here. That's how I lose my life to her.
How many tape recorders can you find? Start with ten, then get ten more. Mr. Chang's got a whole collection. Drive all over the city, across the bay, radio station's giving them away, haul them all back to Bush Street. Spend a fortune in D batteries and fill the teahouse with portable tape recorders, wall to wall. Insert the manong voices into every tape recorder, and press PLAY. PLAY. PLAY. PLAY. PLAY. PLAY. PLAY . . . Konnyaku steps delicately across the player floor, one eye circling circling, pressing his crooked hip into the warm motors, paw snatching at the turning tapes.
Slowly, manong voices grow tape recorder by tape recorder, first chewing together, then burping, lulling quiescence, lips working the oil offish
544
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
and spit, then singing, joking, moving in crazy half beats, sad and melodic, talk talk talk, babeling posterity, singing, speaking simultaneously, unison of jabber jabber jabber, multiplying stories in multiplying dialects, multiplying memories, multiplying songs and jokes and lies, then running wild, staccato, pontificating, stylistic thrills and swoops, strutting and shining, exaggerated pose and cackle, then rising conflicts, battling voices, ha!
Back out and fall into the irises, shoved out by the multiplying sounds, Konnyaku cowering, burrowing his head into your crotch. How many manongs packed into one teahouse? seven hundred? ten thousand? Even with the volume low, their resounding convention rumbles, ten thousand muttering, chewing voices collecting in a crescendo, a crazy rising din, muscular waves of thudding sound pressing at fragile walls of borrowed wood, blowing out the speakers, paper screens ripping in sudden poofs, busting out in frightening wails, screaming herds collecting momentum, exploding ten to the ten times scratching tearing ripping breaking bruising cracking kicking swearing stomping punching twisting growling punching pounding beating pounding fucking fucking fucking fucking. Pick up Konnyaku with every remaining patch of hair porcupined into the air and run away, out the garden, through the gate, down the steps, down Bush Street, run like a fool, run like a fool.
When the police arrive, the landlord's fingering the stem of a crystal spout of Drambuie, catching the last recorded groans and stuttered jabber jabber crying sobbing groaning, dying, whimper wheezing choking sweet sweet single blue banjo twang and ache, spent, moseying away. Anyway, how the hell long can a ninety-minute tape last? Click click snap pop blam zfwit zpitfooo ...
I HOTEL
545