love you! Your idiotic cries roll off into the warmest night of that San Francisco summer.
And rising above the sweet lapping of the bay, you think the moon is a moon, but it is not. It's a blushing jellyfish alive in a cobalt sea, a belly-fish lifting, a great pulsing womb sucking, it's tentacles following, burning the hand that enters, entangling about the fingers, drawing them upward, plunging, tactile sensations traveling, the knowing shudder of the inner heart, the jelly's cruel, spasmed grip, sputter of white ink.
564
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
6: Bard & Huo Lian
Imagine the commotion on Columbus under the awning at City Lights, excited public primping for an imagined paparazzi, poet literati emerging from the netherworld of our pacific Barbary, scratching forty-eight-hour beards, replacing lipstick gloss, pupils punched from black confetti. The night is yours, name aglow in City Lights, published book of collected poems displayed prominently in the window, and, appearing tonight, reading and book signing by you, the author.
Where the fuck is he?
Paul, the editor, is pacing around nervously, wondering if someone's finally killed you off for your innocence. Arthur is the paparazzi, moving through the crowd and flashing photos of your historic moment. Hiro is uncorking, pouring, and drinking the wine, and about an hour into the scheduled event, George raises his glass, proposes a toast, and proceeds to read all your poems, starting on page one.
Make love, not war. What does this really mean?
It happens during rehearsal, Huo Lian playing the Japanese prostitute who's fallen in love with the young clerk, played by Bard. They've modernized the old eighteenth-century Chikamatsu play originally written for Bunraku puppet theatre, kept the Japanese costuming and the powdered faces but with a tattered, Brechtian edge. Separated by greed and the social desires of others, the star-crossed lovers find no recourse except the promise of life together in death. It begins in the scene where Bard is hidden under Huo Lian's robes, touching her feet tucked beneath her buttocks, and travels to the last scenes of michiyuki when their bodies gasp together in the final throes of passion.
I flubbed the last lines, Bard apologizes.
We just need more time, Huo Lian answers.
Maybe if I come over to your place.
Yes, you'd better. Only a few days to opening.
I have a confession to make. I flubbed my lines because—
I HOTEL
565
I know. Maybe we can use it to our advantage.
I didn't understand the play until that moment.
I still don't understand the play. I don't understand my feelings.
What are you feeling?
Possessed. I feel taken over by ghosts.
Are you afraid?
Are you?
Someone says, Stop George before he reads the whole book.
Paul gets up and talks about how you and he went through piles of your papers and finally culled them down to this.
Hiro gets up and talks about how he first met you, how he walked into this storefront on Post Street just before they tore the street down and found you trying to run a used bookstore in a condemned building. Nothing in there but Japanese porn, but the real stuff. Seriously, the woodcut originals. Hiro toasts his glass like he should know, then points to your photo on the book cover and says, This guy could sell one volume of porn and live on that money for how many months? That's what he did. Sold one lousy book, then turned the CLOSED sign in the window and disappeared. Who knows where the hell he goes?
The night goes on like that with stories about how folks met you, what you did together, what people remember, jokes and lies and folklore, filling up the time, roasting your present spirit though absent body.
Bard says, The next time I'm under your robes, I'm going to touch you here.
And I thought you had a foot fetish.
I'm Korean. We don't have foot fetishes.
I never dated a Korean.
You told me you never dated an Asian.
Dated. Just no boyfriends.
And?
I can't stop staring at you. Matching noses. Matching foreheads. Matching lips.
Matching bodies.
All day long I speak my lines to your lines. We who love each other are cursed alike. May we be reborn in the same lotus.
566
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
We hurry toward our end, hoping our two souls will find the same dwelling. Do not mistake the way, do not lose me.
Are you making love to Ohatsu or to me?
Who are you?
I don't know.
I think I'm afraid of Huo Lian. Maybe Ohatsu is easier. Maybe Ohatsu is more forgiving.
Ohatsu wants to die with you.
And Huo Lian?
Huo Lian is complicated.
Why is that?
I've lost all my boyfriends, you know. They think I'm like Ohatsu, but I'm not. Sometimes you get between someone's idea of beauty, and you feel so ugly.
Well, that's what you get for going with white guys.
Admit you don't want white girls too. Your body shames you. Your mind screws you.
And us?
It's different. You know that. This, she grabs him, belongs to me.
I guess you got me.
No, we have to share.
Tokubei's given it up to you.
And Bard?
Bard is complicated.
Huo Lian nods in disgust, Bard already has a fiancee. She fingers the ring on his hand, then pounds him on his chest.
We're just rehearsing, remember?
Feel this. Are we rehearsing?
We're rehearsing.
Keep rehearsing.
Don't stop.
The storytelling peters out, and the bottles turned on end dribble out their last liquid hyperboles.
George says, Hey Paul, you want me to sign his books? I can forge his signature. Hey, lemme sign that book for you. Least I can do for our
I HOTEL
567
friends.
Let's go get some grub.
I could use another drink.
Wonder what happened to him? Maybe he just forgot. Got the dates wrong.
Did you check the teahouse? He's probably in there screwing.
Don't worry. He'll turn up. He always turns up.
Maybe he's writing another book.
Bard says, since doing this play, I got an idea for another play based on a famous protest poem using Korean pansori singing.
No one is doing anything Korean. You should work on it.
It's an allegory called Ballad of Five Bandits, about corrupt officials who represent actual politicians in the current South Korean government. It could be dangerous to do it.
All the better.
The poet who wrote it, Chiha Kim, is a political prisoner in Seoul now on death row. I have this idea that he plays the drum side of the song from prison.
Huo Lian says, O.K., that's your project. Here's mine. I'm working on a film using cuts from Hollywood films that stereotype Orientals with that yellow peril shit. I did this edit on Super 8. She sets up the projector. Check out Fu Manchu and Anna Mae Wong.
Film's silent. Let me play some pansori for you. It's similar to the chanter in bunraku, except the singer's accompanied by a drummer.
Black flickers over white, black Betty Boop lips and black fu manchu caught in slanted poses beneath dark inscrutability, hatch a plan, a poisoned death, the throaty vibrato of the pansori driven by yelps, sighs, and the deep slap of the drum, satiric tragicomedy condemns the poet but sings forever over his execution. Enclosed by sound and image in a dark room, tense and frantic sensations grip inky erogenous zones, and play and memory return to desire.
I can't be in the dark with you.
It's rehearsal time again.
The hungry group leaves City Lights and treks toward Chinatown for cheap chop suey and lots of it, probably descends into Woey Loy Goey's
568
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
greasy basement.
So, George says, Ginsberg claims a poetic connection to Walt Whitman through, you know, sex. So Ginsberg fucked this poet who fucked this poet who fucked this poet who fucked Whitman.
Who are you fucking these days? It could be important. Any poets?
I'm celibate, man.
I wanna poetic connection back to Lady Murasaki. Think you can arrange that?
How about Basho?
Li Po?
O.K.,Li Po.
Shit, what's Whitman? One hundred years? Li Po's gotta be over a thousand. That's a lotta fucking-fucking.
You ordering or what?
Barbequed pork egg foo young.
Steamed pork hash with salted duck egg.
Almond duck.
Seaweed soup.
Black bean sauce with beef tripe.
Braised catfish Cantonese style
Steamed squab with sausage and black mushroom.
Beef chow fun.
Cashew nut chicken.
Is that going to be enough?
We're going to eat ourselves to death.
You forget the steamed rice?
Wontons to start.
Get ready to die.
It's the night of the understudies. Bard and Huo Lian make their excuses. Anyway the show is ending in a few nights, and they should give others a chance at the lead roles. No one knows that they sneak back into the theatre and hide in the wings behind the curtains, folded together with the stilted language forming with precision on their lips, the staged movements passing through their heaving bodies, relentless desire, moans ground into skin, stifled gasps timed to theatric gasps, the final journey into the dark forest, their lovers' anguish lamenting the play's inevitable
I HOTEL
569
dissolution. The clatter of wooden clappers and the frenzied stammer of the shamisen announce their descent into hell. Tokubei binds Ohatsu to the emblematic pine and palm growing from a single trunk and strikes his knife, recklessly hysterical, slices at her tender throat and then his own, and in the dark wings, Bard and Huo Lian die their ecstatic slaying again and again. You are mine alone, forever, and it will never be like this again.
Return late from the Delta to the I-Hotel with two tired old manongs and forty-six inches and twenty pounds of prehistoric sturgeon caught with ghost shrimp on a two-inch hook off a rental boat near the Dump Gate across from Vieira's Resort.
Shit, you say as you push back the door of the teahouse and Konnyaku jumps at your fishy body. You knew there was something else you were supposed to be doing tonight.
57°
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
7: Renee & Ken
Hiro's horn-rimmed glasses, framed by a scraggy bush of graying hair and stringy beard, appear in the door of your bookstore. Hey, he says. You back?
Oh, yeah.
Where you been?
Kyushu.
How about the Philippines? You go there?
No. Why not?
I go there, they'll say I'm not from there. I don't have to go where I'm from but never been, right?
And they say I don't make sense. Hiro flips through your sparse merchandise on makeshift shelves. What were you thinking when you opened this place?
At the time, seemed like a good idea.
Shoulda got yourself arrested like me for selling indecency. What is this place but a funky Edo porn shop?
Oh no, these are all ancient instructional manuals.
Hiro chuckles, You came home in time. They're gonna ram their balls through that wall any day now. I was thinking I was going to have to break in to save your shunga and shit all by myself.
One more time, you and Hiro haul the shunga out of your defunct bookstore back to the floating pantry. Take the sign down that says USED RARE OUT-OF-PRINT BOOKS and turn the CLOSED sign around in the window forever.
Take a pot of rice, bottle of Coke, couple raw eggs, and a bowl of this slimy stuff Hiro calls natto down to the teahouse. You stick to rice and tea, but Hiro whips up the raw eggs and natto with shoyu in his bowl of rice and digs in, swapping the rice goop with swigs of Coke. You didn't eat this in Kyushu? he asks. He puts a glob of it in Konnyaku's bowl. See, he likes it.
I HOTEL
571