Descend into the bowels of Arthur Ma's basement, six light bulbs hanging in an abandoned fortune cookie factory. Arthur uses the old vats to mix paints and wash brushes, and uses the heating grills like palettes. Every inch of wall space covered with his oil canvases, monstrous figures splattered aggressively in distorted robust strokes of dirty color, a relentless series birthing one cruel vision after another. Arthur sits disheveled, eyes bloodshot, under one of the light bulbs at an easel sketching all his monsters, tossing the writhing demons into piles spread over the floor. Let the eyes adjust to Arthur's dim underworld, and follow George through the labyrinth of paper, canvas, paint, booze, drugs, and related paraphernalia to the center.
Hey, Arthur.
Arthur growls.
What happened to the nudes?
Models cost money. Taps his head. Free.
Free's a concept.
Sophie?
Gone away to Tokyo.
But stop. Remember the first day you met Sophie. George Baso pops his head into the teahouse and says, Let's go hang out in Arthur Ma's Chinatown basement and write poetry.
Pick up some manju and black coffee at Benkyodo, trot out of J-Town, and head over to Chinatown.
How come the basement? What if I'm writing about nature?
All the more reason. When did you last study what's underground?
Descend into the same bowels of Arthur's basement, same six light bulbs hanging in an abandoned fortune cookie factory, but in those days illuminating a world of nudes, sketches, and oil canvases of every color and kind of woman in every lascivious, languid, odalisque, or standing position, squatting, bending, turning, same robust strokes of thick inten-
546
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
sity birthing one feminine vision after another. Arthur stands in the basement center at his easel pressing his brush in quick gestures, glancing back and forth at a seated model, her bare breasts and head turned to catch a swatch of light passing through the barred window at street level. Though in the basement with six low-watt bulbs, everything seems bathed in light.
Hey Arthur.
Hey.
Stand with George respectfully, looking indirectly at the naked woman, wondering where to look. Look at Arthur's painting.
Arthur waves his brush and says, That's Sophie.
Hi.
We're here to write poetry.
You've come to the right place. Sophie is poetry. Then he gets up, walks over to an old cabinet, and pulls out a dusty bag. Been saving this for you.
Look in the bag and pull out tiny strips of paper. You have a secret admirer. Love asks no questions. A rainbow requires rain. Love like wildflow-ers is found in wild places.
Grab a seat and write.
Sophie and Egan meet on Telegraph at Moe's reaching for the same used book: The Tao of Love at the Spring Palace. His smile is eloquent. Her body flushes.
I think I might have been here first, he taunts.
Recuperating quickly, she retorts, This may be the only copy. I've already checked at Bancroft.
Studying?
Art.
Of course.
What do you mean by that?
Well, maybe you'd consider sharing.
What? She grabs the book from the shelf. It's large and square and heavy.
He also claims it with a firm grip on the other corner.
She tugs it away. He tugs back. Back and forth, until she tugs as forcefully as possible, the volume slipping from his hands and she falling in a backward thrust, rumbling against the shelf. He rushes forward, creating
I HOTEL
547
an umbrella with his arms and shoulders as the entirety of the great arts of China, every porcelain vase and inked landscape in book form, topple around her.
Are you all right? I'm really sorry.
She scrambles around, picking up the fallen books, too embarrassed to speak.
No, he says. Please just sit for a moment. This is all my fault. He picks up and rearranges the books. He smiles sheepishly. Saved you from the Great Wall.
The last book is the book in question, The Tao of Love, tossed open to a random page, a Ming print of a Chinese couple seated, with their genitals tenderly pressed together, in a pavilion surrounded by water lilies, a weeping willow falling gently over its roof.
On the way to the I-Hotel, check out Arthur's studio from time to time. Pose naked for Arthur because it seems natural in the presence of so much nakedness. Must be like being in a nudist colony, you say to Arthur. Sophie's usually there in a hippy smock sketching complicated figures, but always working on the same large abstract oil painting, a radiating presence of heat and color, the only art that's not human and naked in the basement. Learn that Sophie was one of Arthur's students from when he was at the Institute. Still working on that same painting, he gestures at her continuing work. Masterpiece. I can't work so slow, he shakes his head. I get bored.
So what about all these nudes?
I tell you a story. My father was a Confucian scholar right here in Chinatown. Everything was by the Confucian book, but he had all these daughters, seven beautiful daughters and then me, his only son. If he had lived, he'd still be having daughters. I was the wild card, the mistake, but Chinese don't think that way. So I was really spoiled. You can imagine. But you think about the pressure of being the only male heir to a Confucian scholar. Maybe you can play the patriarch, but the truth is my mother and my seven sisters ran the show. My father and I were just hanging around like a couple of jewels in the crown. So every opportunity I snuck away, crossed Broadway, did acid, found enlightenment, became a Taoist.
548
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
Think about your teahouse and Zen. Taoism's a further complication. Scratch your head.
If George is there, he gets agitated and paces around. Typical. You ask about nudes, you get Confucianism.
O.K. O.K., Arthur says and thinks. Confucianism serves the patriarchy. It's a complicated set of laws to preserve a bureaucracy with the patriarch at the top. But Taoism serves the matriarchy. The Confucian patriarch generates kids to build his kingdom. The Taoist matriarch generates energy to prolong life.
Probably all bullshit, George snickers.
Take a look at this. Arthur hands George a book.
I can't read Chinese.
Handbook of the Plain Maiden Su-nu. It's in all there. Arthur taps the cover. The spirit of the valley never dies. She is the mysterious gate. The great secret of the Tao is the key to longevity.
Egan turns, wraps his limbs around Sophie, who turns again and wraps herself around him, bodies slipping over and around, under and down.
Roll your body over in an arch like this.
Grab my thighs. Tighter.
Pull down on my hips.
Your hair's tickling my butt.
Hang on.
What is this?
Can't you tell? Yin and yang.
Who's Yin?
Beats me.
Are you the white tiger or am I?
I'm the white tiger. You're the green dragon.
Are you sure? Let me see that book.
No, don't move. We've created a sculpture.
Like contortionists in a circus.
I need to move. I think I might fart.
Farts are yang.
Take several trips into Arthur's basement before finally figuring out his arcane connections from Taoism to nude portraiture. It's all explained in
I HOTEL
549
the Chinese writing, the lessons of Su-nu, who instructs the Yellow Emperor on the art of the bedchamber. Arouse the woman, taking her with increasing pleasure through the ten movements, observing the exercises of pleasure and health but keeping one's vital energies. Practice this art, and live to 150. Elixir of life. The Yellow Emperor became immortal, ascending to heaven after intercourse with twelve hundred women. Some accounts figure thirty-six hundred. Arthur figures a thousand nudes will take him to a hundred. He's not greedy.
Sophie asks, What about women?
Women don't have to worry. You're the source.
I guess so.
Everyone looks at Sophie's protruding belly bumping into the basement clutter of Arthur's documenting canvases, her mountain rising month by month.
Later George says, Arthur's been hiding Sophie until the baby comes. She's got a room back of the basement. Her folks have a flower business in Alameda. They think she's in L.A.
Who's the father?
That's the thing. It's Egan.
Egan?
Arthur's son. You didn't know? Arthur had a son. Fell in love with a beautiful black woman a while back. One day Egan showed up.
Where is he now?
Vietnam.
Egan, Sophie whispers and rolls away with the book. Five signs. Five desires. Ten movements. Nine positions. Thirty methods. Have you been doing your homework?
Let's start with the five signs. First your vital energies rise, and you blush. He laughs. You never stopped blushing since the bookstore. You are just one long blush.
You rat. O.K., what next?
Let me see that book.
No fair cheating.
One should kiss lightly.
The nipples become hard, and you sweat around your nose.
Softly embrace.
550
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
Tongue becomes thick and moist, and you swallow.
I get really wet.
Then I should caress you softly.
My throat is dry, and I swallow constantly.
Now rock lightly back and forth.
Rock me, yes.
I'm rocking you, baby.
Reversed Dragon, she rasps.
Eight times shallow. Two times deeply.
All your ailments will vanish.
Push aside the sliding door to find George pacing in the garden. Come on, he says. Sophie's baby's due.
Stare through the big window at a dozen tiny swaddled newborns in a dozen crib trays on rollers. Scrunchy heads with sleeping eyes, dozing, little mouths yawning, wailing, groping, opening and closing around imaginary nipples. Tiny hands folded inside oversized sleeves.
Which one is it?
Maybe that one. Looks like a dark version of Arthur.
They all look the same.
It doesn't matter. We won't see it again.
Why?
Sophie's giving it up for adoption. Arthur got the word about Egan. KIA.
I HOTEL
551