2: Where will you live when you get old?
A little after ten at night on a Wednesday in August, the third day of that summer month in 1977, we got the call, the red alert. Maybe we had our suspicions or had been warned, had seen the extra commotion of riot cops training on nearby Folsom and Nineteenth, heard the rumor of reserved parking for police cars in all the downtown garages, had the inconvenience of getting rerouted because of closed freeway ramps, saw the mounted police grooming their stallions over on Market. Their mobilization was gaining momentum, but we too began to activate our own preparations, phoned the next ten people on our list who would phone the next ten and the next ten, spreading the alert over hundreds of telephone lines across the city and the bay. One by one we emerged from our slumbers, exchanged our pajamas for heavy padded coats and work jeans and helmets, put down our evening beers, shut down a summer rerun of Earetta (French connection detective and his pet cockatoo), abandoned our books, our pool cues, our rum and Cokes, our horny lovers, rushed away to bang on the doors of our neighbors, gathered our walkie-talkies, filled our pants pockets with coins for the phone booth and bus fare, our jacket pockets with face masks, Hershey bars, corn nuts, and beef jerky, attached our armbands with safety pins, and marched to cars and buses and bicycles and motorcycles, revving up all our motors and churning our wheels and our feet, heading out into the late evening streets, walking our bodies and our collective determination toward a single three-story brick building on the corner of Jackson and Kearny. We would save the International Hotel.
Thus we emerged from every living crevice in our hilly city, every tenement, blighted Victorian, public housing project, cheap hotel, single or collective rental, many of us the forgotten and abandoned people whose voices were muffled in the underbelly of working poverty, stuffed into the various ethnic ghettos, we the immigrants from the Old and New Worlds, from the black and white South and tribal America, we the dockworkers of the long shore, we the disabled and disavowed vets, we
588
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
the gay and leathered, we the garment workers, restaurant workers, postal and clerical workers, we who praised the Lord in his house at Glide and his People's Temple, we of the unions, tired and poor, we the people. But why save an old hotel?
Because if we remembered the history of our city, we would remember how frontier towns began: with a trading post and a saloon with a second floor of lodging rooms. In time, we saw erected a jail with our troublemakers, a courthouse with our records, and a bank with our money. The trading post became a dry goods store, and the saloon a restaurant and hotel. That was our basic town. After that, we'd add a church and a school, and possibly some local professionals—a doctor and a lawyer. But when we took everything away and thought only about the second floor of lodging rooms, we remembered that people have always come from distances and had to be accommodated, given shelter and a bed, and what we used to call board. And it wasn't as if you could get this board for nothing; you had to pay or have something to exchange. That exchange was its own respectability, a kind of citizenship.
This basic town got complicated and multiplied into a thing we call a city, with every kind of reinvented trading post and saloon and lodging that over time we could imagine. And we supposed that the history of any city could be told through the comings and goings of any trading post or saloon, but thinking as we do, as people coming to the city to find work to pay for shelter and board, whether just for ourselves or for our families accompanying or left behind, it was the lodging that most concerned us. And we could see how city life and hotel life were inextricably connected, that what the city had to offer had a home in the hotel. Over time, we'd forgotten that hotels in our city have long served as temporary but also permanent homes, that living in hotels had been a normal consequence of living in our city. From the inception of our city, our city life could perhaps be translated as hotel life, the way that we as young, single, and independent people could arrive to find work in the industry of the city, find the small cafes and bars, theaters and social clubs, laundries, shops, and bookstores, all within walking distance or perhaps a cable stop away. Even if we did not actually live in hotels, we may have participated in, if not considered, the simple luxuries of hotel life: the bustling social life of our streets, the hotels' communal restaurants and social galas, the convenience
I HOTEL
589
of maid service and bedsheets changed, the possibility of being completely freed from any housework, the possible leisure to think or to create, and finally the anonymity and privacy of a room of our own. Hotel life defined the freedom of the city, but such freedom has been for some reason suspect, and there are always those who want to police freedom.
Finally, like the society that evolved in our city, there have been, of course, hotels for those with money and hotels for those of us with not so much money. And even though the city required our labor and allowed us housing in cheap hotels, in time we came to know that laboring people are necessary but considered transitory. Eventually, it was thought, we'd just go away or become invisible. So even if hotels depended on our constant occupancy, we were not considered permanent or stable members of society. We did not own our homes. We may have had families, but hotels were suspect places to raise children, and so we were suspect families. Our communal lives in hotels with shared bathrooms and shared dining, shared genders, shared ethnicities, and heaven forbid, shared thinking that might lead to shared politics, were also suspect. Hotel life might even be subversive. A famous scholar who studied our hotel life warned us that when there are no homes, there will be no nation. But what did he mean by home? And, for that matter, what did he mean by nation?
By the time we got the red alert to place our bodies in a human barricade around an old hotel that held seventy years of our city's hotel history, we were already the displaced people in the city's plan to impose a particular meaning of home and a particular meaning of nation. Since our hotel life was considered suspect morally and socially, our hotels should naturally be replaced by proper single-family houses built in locations distant from the city, and our hotels and all our businesses that serviced us should be replaced with what the city was properly useful for: trading posts, jails, courthouses, and saloons. And no one should be allowed to live over a saloon unless he was just passing through. A commercial room was simply not a dwelling. These edicts were substantiated by zoning and blight laws allowing the city to use eminent domain to liberate our homes for the public good, even if the public good meant giving up our property for the wealthy few. Almost as quickly as an earthquake, our neighborhoods located in the Fillmore and South of Market were already razed and being replaced by forty-eight-story multinational corporate trading
590
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
posts. Even if we were expected to build, maintain, clean, and service these posts, we weren't expected to live anywhere nearby. Be at work promptly at eight a.m., but please, please disappear by five p.m. But this was an impossible request because we could not leave, and we had nowhere to go. So that night in August, far past our five p.m. curfew and into the next morning, we gathered around the I-Hotel to face four hundred officers of the police, sheriffs, and fire departments all dressed up in riot gear, to demonstrate that we had not disappeared and that we were finally fed up. What was the total cost to us as taxpayers, not just in overtime and equipment, but everything—everything it took over how many months in anticipation to deploy the full force of the city's and county's final retribution? No doubt more than a million dollars, the insipid worth of the structure we defended.
Had we not ourselves elected these men of good intentions: the mayor who ran out of promises, the judge who ruled for eviction despite a hung jury, and the sheriff who carried out a law he thought to be unjust? Did these elected officials also think that our city was only useful for trading posts, a courthouse, and a jail?
Armed with only our bodies, we faced our officers of the law—heavily protected by face helmets, gloves, sticks, given height by their tall animals, speed by their motorcycles, reach by their aerial ladders, and ultimately power by their deadly weapons. We saw the barricades part for the Sheriff himself, driving up to the I-Hotel. He emerged from his vehicle as if it were his powerful steed and stood in the blinding spotlights of that evening, young and handsome, dressed informally in a gold turtleneck sweater and casual jacket, bidding his dinner partner a sweet goodnight. Perhaps it was a brash double-oh-seven gesture lost to our angry chanting. We knew he had been convicted for contempt of court, spending five days in his own jail for refusing in January to carry out the court order of eviction of the tenants of the I-Hotel. Was he not one of our own people, our own gallant knight, and would he not once again take a stand in our favor? Had he not himself complained that the laws of our society were written to protect those with property and money? Would he later justify his part in the eviction based on having, as an officer of the law, to carry out the law, just or unjust as it may be?
As two thousand of us were eventually bullied away from the hotel
I HOTEL	591
entrance, we saw our sheriff enter at the head of his deputies, leading them into the hotel and the final phase of the eviction, breaking into the doors of each of the hotel tenants and ordering them to leave their homes. And yes, we knew that each room was a tiny home, a place of final refuge for a lifetime of work, and that the room, though housed in a hotel, was still a home.
So when we saw our sheriff place his sledgehammer to the first door, banging and splintering the old dark wood into jagged pieces, we were ourselves diminished by every stroke of his hammer. We heard the wretched sobbing cry of horror, an anguished plea but also a warning, No! Don't do it! Don't do it! But our sheriff had made his decision, perhaps, he justified, to take responsibility by being an actor in this painful event, to mitigate what he imagined could have been a more violent end. But we would never forget his violent presence on that night and the sad betrayal of his actions.
Shame! Shame! Shame! we cried.
Where will you live when you get old?
Where will we live when we get old?
592
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
3: We won't move
We grew up here, and we lived here: in Chinatown under colorful pagoda roofs and serenaded by flower drum songs down Grant Avenue; in Fil-ipinotown in heroic Bataan bars and courted with sampaguita flowers •along Kearny Street; in Japantown between jazz spots and cherry blossom festivals around Post and Buchanan. We lived in the centers of our city's Oriental tourist attractions, our li'l towns described as "exotic Kodak moments" in Sunset and other travel magazines. We were always smiling for our customers, saying that if they visited our towns, it would be the next best thing to traveling to the real countries, even if some of us had never even been there. We supposed that joining our city's tourist industry was part of our contribution, a survival feature that came out of the consequences of how we got here, but that's a long story. And once we got here, well, that's another.
Maybe we all look alike, and maybe the laws lump us all together so we got to stick together, even though we're really different and can't understand each other and our folks back in the old countries hated each other's guts. A good war will always get people to line up on one side or the other of the enemy lines, but those lines don't last forever, especially if you can't tell who is who without their uniforms. And when we all got stripped down to our bare bodies, it turned out we could be black, brown, red, white, or yellow. Now if we were going to have to work with the rules of a color wheel, well then maybe we should get to define what our color is. But creating that definition turned out to be a complicated and impossible task no matter how we circled around it or tried to confine it, and we argued long and hard about this until perhaps we've never really resolved it. Maybe there's no resolution; the problem of the color wheel in America has a long and deep history, and just as we pass on our physical attributes to every new generation, we also pass on that long legacy of hatred and assumptions.
But as we started to say, we lived here, many of us born and raised. While our towns' borders were porous for outsiders, we ourselves were
I HOTEL
593