entrance, we saw our sheriff enter at the head of his deputies, leading them into the hotel and the final phase of the eviction, breaking into the doors of each of the hotel tenants and ordering them to leave their homes. And yes, we knew that each room was a tiny home, a place of final refuge for a lifetime of work, and that the room, though housed in a hotel, was still a home.
So when we saw our sheriff place his sledgehammer to the first door, banging and splintering the old dark wood into jagged pieces, we were ourselves diminished by every stroke of his hammer. We heard the wretched sobbing cry of horror, an anguished plea but also a warning, No! Don't do it! Don't do it! But our sheriff had made his decision, perhaps, he justified, to take responsibility by being an actor in this painful event, to mitigate what he imagined could have been a more violent end. But we would never forget his violent presence on that night and the sad betrayal of his actions.
Shame! Shame! Shame! we cried.
Where will you live when you get old?
Where will we live when we get old?
592
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
3: We won't move
We grew up here, and we lived here: in Chinatown under colorful pagoda roofs and serenaded by flower drum songs down Grant Avenue; in Fil-ipinotown in heroic Bataan bars and courted with sampaguita flowers •along Kearny Street; in Japantown between jazz spots and cherry blossom festivals around Post and Buchanan. We lived in the centers of our city's Oriental tourist attractions, our li'l towns described as "exotic Kodak moments" in Sunset and other travel magazines. We were always smiling for our customers, saying that if they visited our towns, it would be the next best thing to traveling to the real countries, even if some of us had never even been there. We supposed that joining our city's tourist industry was part of our contribution, a survival feature that came out of the consequences of how we got here, but that's a long story. And once we got here, well, that's another.
Maybe we all look alike, and maybe the laws lump us all together so we got to stick together, even though we're really different and can't understand each other and our folks back in the old countries hated each other's guts. A good war will always get people to line up on one side or the other of the enemy lines, but those lines don't last forever, especially if you can't tell who is who without their uniforms. And when we all got stripped down to our bare bodies, it turned out we could be black, brown, red, white, or yellow. Now if we were going to have to work with the rules of a color wheel, well then maybe we should get to define what our color is. But creating that definition turned out to be a complicated and impossible task no matter how we circled around it or tried to confine it, and we argued long and hard about this until perhaps we've never really resolved it. Maybe there's no resolution; the problem of the color wheel in America has a long and deep history, and just as we pass on our physical attributes to every new generation, we also pass on that long legacy of hatred and assumptions.
But as we started to say, we lived here, many of us born and raised. While our towns' borders were porous for outsiders, we ourselves were
I HOTEL
593
confined within—for example, a Chinatown bounded by California, Kearny, Broadway, and Powell. We didn't cross those streets alone unless we wanted to get beat up. But then again, everything we thought we needed was contained within our towns—our foodstuffs and medications, our banking, our old country associations, our schools, our churches, our newspapers and means of communication, our extended families. Although outsiders may have thought we operated large secret societies within our towns, there were very few secrets that everyone among us didn't already know—our real and paper names, our real and assumed social positions, our political affiliations, our mistresses, our favorite and illegitimate children, our failed business negotiations, our good and bad habits. We were an open book written in a hundred dialects.
By the time the city came to tear down, rearrange, encroach upon, or, as they liked to say, "redevelop" our towns, it's not as if we didn't know it was happening. After all, we were the first merchants, the town patriarchs, the educated sons and daughters, the rising professionals, the veterans of war, whose hard work and sacrifice proved that, given opportunities, we could be worthy citizens. We were notified, and we made our moves to protect our gains and mitigate our loses. We may have been called upon to negotiate these changes, and we did so as honorably as we knew how. But even though we returned to worship, enroll our kids in language school, buy our food, get our haircuts, and, on occasion, gamble in our towns, perhaps we'd moved out to neighborhoods with nicer houses or better schools. And yet, we still returned to gather our kids into drum and bugle corps, drill teams, and scouting clubs, teach the folk dances and martial arts, and sponsor our yearly festivals. We knew where we came from and the value of knowing that, but the war had taught us that nothing stays the same forever, that the world outside, though hostile, was possible, and the safe haven of our li'l towns might not contain everything we wanted in our lives. And anyway we weren't going back to where other folks thought we came from.
But our kids thought we'd betrayed them, and they couldn't appreciate our hopes for their future. Pushy goddamn kids got turned on to the radical politics of the times, protesting everything in sight, giving up the opportunities of college educations to go back to the towns we had
594
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
worked so hard to get them out of. What's a movement? We argued with them and said, It's getting from one place to the next, and how long have we been doing that? But did they listen? If in the early days we supported saving the International Hotel and the lives of the old men who lived there, we became uncertain of our support by the end. It had gone on too long with too much bad publicity for our communities, as if we couldn't control our radical kids who were just looking for a cause and strutting Communism. We weren't against taking care of our own; after all that's the way we were raised, to respect our elders and to take responsibility for our families. So when the I-Hotel came to its end, most of us watched from afar, saw the commotion on the evening news or in the morning newspapers, hoped our kids weren't hurt or jailed, shook our heads at an ending we might have predicted. But when we saw the elderly tenants thrown out on the streets, maybe we saw ourselves, our own stories of struggle and sacrifice connected to their stories, and we knew that whatever our kids had been trying to do, we could agree on this one thing—the honor due to those who've gone before.
So maybe while our kids had come home to sleep off the long working hours of their protesting days and nights, we went out to inspect the very last building that remained of what used to be Filipinotown, the absolute end of our old hometown. We walked down Kearny and remembered when one side of that street was Ilocano and the other side was Visayan; how on this street corner, we used to sell the News for three cents or the Call for five cents a copy, or how we used to hustle shoeshines on Sundays. We remembered how we could run into a union foreman who would promise us two seasons of work canning in Alaska, and how we could make about five hundred bucks for four-and-a-half months of work. Or maybe we'd get ten bucks to spar at a boxing gym and got to know the local featherweight champs. We remembered how the old-timers at Julian's taught us to play pool and palalasi, and how we learned to pay our respects by pouring a round of whiskey in small paper cups at the end of a good game. We remembered where we used to eat—at the Sampaguita, the LVM owned by Nina, the Bataan Cafe owned by Ramy, the Mandalay Club owned by Ness, the PI Clipper before it became the Silver Wing owned by Mimi and Jimmy, and the Bayong Sikat Cafe. And we remember how we learned to cook fish from Johnny Bulong-
I HOTEL
595
long at the Golden Gate. Then there were the bars, Blanco's, La Plantera, and Mr. Bing's owned by the Tolentinos. We used to get our haircuts at Noy Noy's, do our dry cleaning at Lapu Lapu, get our suits tailored by Babe Samson, and our cigarettes at the Mango Smoke Shop. We knew which establishments were Tagalog, which Ilocano or Visayan, and depending, we stuck with our kabayans.
We stood in front of the old door that had been Julian's and thereafter the Lucky M Pool Hall and Mike's Barbershop, and finally we remembered how the old-timers always dressed up. They could be cooks or bus-boys, but they came into the pool halls in their dapper Mclntoshes and platform shoes. They hung their coats on hangers, never loosening their ties but throwing them carefully over their shoulders, removing their fancy cufflinks and rolling up their long silk sleeves. Then they washed their hands and chalked up their cues. We could hear again the knock and clack of wood on wood and the clatter of tumbling balls into the corner pockets, the accompanying guttural chuckles of satisfaction.
But then our memories were suddenly distracted. Devin wasn't an old-timer, certainly not one of our old manongs, but he was still a tenant evicted from the I-Hotel. Maybe he was the youngest tenant and continued to hang around Kearny, having lost his home and thinking he should still be doing surveillance, just in case. Devin was accompanied by Eddie Yu, the last and only old tenant of the Victory Hotel. The Victory Hotel was in fact right next door to the I-Hotel and also owned by Enchanted Seas Investments, but no one paid much attention to the Victory. No one thought to barricade it with their bodies since Enchanted Seas had long accomplished its eviction except for one last Chinese holdout, Eddie, who still lived there without lights, heat, or even water.
We followed Devin and Eddie, shouting excitedly and running down an alley to one side of the I-Hotel. We saw these puny men, one young and one old, pick up two long two-by-fours, holding their wooden weapons before them like great lances and running to attack a slowly approaching bulldozer, its gigantic wheels churning, exhaust spouting up its pipes, steel blade heading to wreck the back wall of the I-Hotel. And ridiculously, we stood with them and challenged the great machine as it plunged forward, shoving bricks and mortar and steel rods into a gaping wound, but it was too late.
596
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
4: The people united will never be defeated
These were the years when we were young and foolish, our bodies lithe, our minds awake, and our smiles innocent, and the International Hotel was a great brick building with four possible entryways. We picked a door, possibly any door, a conscious decision or an intuition, and upon entering, we found ourselves captured within a place we recognized as home, not the home we'd left, but the very home we hoped to find. Or perhaps it was a home with what we might call potential, so that we knew we could give up our energies to making it what we imagined it should be. For some of us, it was family and purpose, for some a realization of our talents, and for others, it was an idea, and not just any idea.
We could argue that there were never only four doors, that there were plenty more, that there were doors within doors, and probably a few back doors and escape passages. And over time, the doors may have also changed, but by the end of our great struggle to save our International Hotel, we could speak of four radical youth groups who had weathered the long haul and had given our youth to these days.
Traveling north on Kearny from Washington toward the lucky numbers 848, we may have been enticed to enter Everybody's Bookstore, displaying its radical collection of books inside the Asian Community Center, ACC for short. We may have lingered among the many volumes and pamphlets by and about Marx, Lenin, Engels, Stalin, and Mao, amazed to see such an open array of Communist literature. Perhaps we recognized a bold display, or perhaps we were merely curious about what we understood to be a forbidden literature we had never read. We browsed through the volumes wondering what would happen if we read them, what could be so dangerous about the words held within. We might have picked up a copy of a newspaper, Wei Min Baoy and realized that these were also the offices of the Wei Min She, the Organization of the People, its slogan Serve the People. Maybe we stuck around and eventually returned to buy and read books, to join study groups, to work on the research for a book about Chinese workers in America and in the
I HOTEL
597