long at the Golden Gate. Then there were the bars, Blanco's, La Plantera, and Mr. Bing's owned by the Tolentinos. We used to get our haircuts at Noy Noy's, do our dry cleaning at Lapu Lapu, get our suits tailored by Babe Samson, and our cigarettes at the Mango Smoke Shop. We knew which establishments were Tagalog, which Ilocano or Visayan, and depending, we stuck with our kabayans.
We stood in front of the old door that had been Julian's and thereafter the Lucky M Pool Hall and Mike's Barbershop, and finally we remembered how the old-timers always dressed up. They could be cooks or bus-boys, but they came into the pool halls in their dapper Mclntoshes and platform shoes. They hung their coats on hangers, never loosening their ties but throwing them carefully over their shoulders, removing their fancy cufflinks and rolling up their long silk sleeves. Then they washed their hands and chalked up their cues. We could hear again the knock and clack of wood on wood and the clatter of tumbling balls into the corner pockets, the accompanying guttural chuckles of satisfaction.
But then our memories were suddenly distracted. Devin wasn't an old-timer, certainly not one of our old manongs, but he was still a tenant evicted from the I-Hotel. Maybe he was the youngest tenant and continued to hang around Kearny, having lost his home and thinking he should still be doing surveillance, just in case. Devin was accompanied by Eddie Yu, the last and only old tenant of the Victory Hotel. The Victory Hotel was in fact right next door to the I-Hotel and also owned by Enchanted Seas Investments, but no one paid much attention to the Victory. No one thought to barricade it with their bodies since Enchanted Seas had long accomplished its eviction except for one last Chinese holdout, Eddie, who still lived there without lights, heat, or even water.
We followed Devin and Eddie, shouting excitedly and running down an alley to one side of the I-Hotel. We saw these puny men, one young and one old, pick up two long two-by-fours, holding their wooden weapons before them like great lances and running to attack a slowly approaching bulldozer, its gigantic wheels churning, exhaust spouting up its pipes, steel blade heading to wreck the back wall of the I-Hotel. And ridiculously, we stood with them and challenged the great machine as it plunged forward, shoving bricks and mortar and steel rods into a gaping wound, but it was too late.
596
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
4: The people united will never be defeated
These were the years when we were young and foolish, our bodies lithe, our minds awake, and our smiles innocent, and the International Hotel was a great brick building with four possible entryways. We picked a door, possibly any door, a conscious decision or an intuition, and upon entering, we found ourselves captured within a place we recognized as home, not the home we'd left, but the very home we hoped to find. Or perhaps it was a home with what we might call potential, so that we knew we could give up our energies to making it what we imagined it should be. For some of us, it was family and purpose, for some a realization of our talents, and for others, it was an idea, and not just any idea.
We could argue that there were never only four doors, that there were plenty more, that there were doors within doors, and probably a few back doors and escape passages. And over time, the doors may have also changed, but by the end of our great struggle to save our International Hotel, we could speak of four radical youth groups who had weathered the long haul and had given our youth to these days.
Traveling north on Kearny from Washington toward the lucky numbers 848, we may have been enticed to enter Everybody's Bookstore, displaying its radical collection of books inside the Asian Community Center, ACC for short. We may have lingered among the many volumes and pamphlets by and about Marx, Lenin, Engels, Stalin, and Mao, amazed to see such an open array of Communist literature. Perhaps we recognized a bold display, or perhaps we were merely curious about what we understood to be a forbidden literature we had never read. We browsed through the volumes wondering what would happen if we read them, what could be so dangerous about the words held within. We might have picked up a copy of a newspaper, Wei Min Baoy and realized that these were also the offices of the Wei Min She, the Organization of the People, its slogan Serve the People. Maybe we stuck around and eventually returned to buy and read books, to join study groups, to work on the research for a book about Chinese workers in America and in the
I HOTEL
597
process worked on a campaign to mobilize support for striking Chinatown workers in a small electronics sweatshop called Lee Mah.
But perhaps we headed for the center door with numbers 848, the entrance to the International Hotel itself, stairs leading to the second-floor offices of the International Hotel Tenants Association or IHTA. And although the offices of the Union of Democratic Filipinos or the Katipunan ng mga Demokratikong Filipino, KDP for short, were not located here, their associated members were here busy at work. We may have come to support the opposition to the Marcos regime and martial law in the Philippines, or perhaps we became involved in the campaign for justice for two Filipina nurses accused of murder at a VA hospital in Michigan. More likely we were here at the I-Hotel to support the elderly hotel tenants, the manongs, in their struggle against eviction.
Or perhaps we approached 848 Kearny traveling from the south from Jackson, in which case we might have entered another door, that of the Kearny Street Workshop or KSW. Perhaps we found ourselves in the workshop's dark room developing black-and-white photos of scenes around Chinatown or portraits of the elderly hotel tenants, or maybe we became involved in the process of making silkscreen posters protesting the war or producing revolutionary T-shirts. During the day, we might have climbed the scaffolds on the Jackson side of the I-Hotel, filled in the colors of that great mural with its giant portraits of fierce manongs. And during the evenings, we returned to pass around a bottle of wine and read our poetry, to work on the publication of a feminist anthology.
But we may have also bypassed the KSW and slipped instead into the door of the Chinese Progressive Association or CPA, attracted to the large posters of Mao Tse-tung, the beautiful landscapes of China, the display of Chinese pamphlets and literature, and the schedule of sponsored events. And within that center, we would find the offices of the IWK or I Wor Kuen, meaning Righteous Harmonious Fist, so named after the Boxer Rebellion. Perhaps we stayed to report and write for the IWK newspaper, Getting Together, or maybe we went into Chinatown to canvass for tuberculosis health reporting. We may have been involved in draft counseling and organized protests against the Vietnam War, or we helped to start food programs for the Chinatown elderly and advocacy for social services and naturalization papers. We worked on cultural programs and
Chinese film nights. We may have helped to organize the tenants at Ping Yuen public housing and to create tenant support groups from other hotels to rally around the I-Hotel.
By now we understood the joke about the Red Block on Kearny and swimming around in radical alphabet soup—KDP, IWK, WMS, KSW, IHTA, CPA, CCA, EBS. On the face of it, we were all radical activist revolutionaries, and we were all united to defeat a capitalist-imperialist system of greed. We threw ourselves into the concerted work of myriad social and political projects, and we worked our butts off. Our commitment and our passion were irreproachable. We were in these years full-time revolutionaries, and we only thought about the revolution we were building, the fierce resistance to a system that served the few and propertied and wealthy, a social system that had failed our immigrant parents and grandparents, had denied their human rights because of their class and color. We learned to educate ourselves in a literature and culture of resistance, and finding ourselves gathered together at the very center of our Asian communities, we also began to educate ourselves in the practice of that resistance. And that practice gave us experience and power. We were young and powerful, and we were the future.
Well, that was the face of it, because over time, despite our agreed ideals, we came to hate each other. For some strange reason, once we entered one of those four inviting radical doors of the I-Hotel and gave our lives to any one of the projects within, our lives were transformed. Our transformation from individuals into collectives was precisely the thing that gave us power, but power has many sides to it, especially the power of a group. Feeling power, wielding power, demonstrating power. A group could act as a single fist or as an open handshake. Well, handshakes were not the tenor of our times. Perhaps it could be said that four mighty fists emerged from four doors to confront a common enemy, to fight in concert the foes of the I-Hotel, but we admit that very often the left fists did not follow the right fists, the punches did not follow the hooks and jabs; we could not agree on our tactics and strategies, and outside of the safety of our doors, we avoided or passed each other in hostility, rushing off to our separate tactics and strategies.
We could blame this all on Lenin and Mao, the two leaders whose theory and practice had led to real revolutions, to the overturning of old social
598
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
599
structures, and we were avid readers and interpreters of their theories and practices. They were our heroes. We thought they had realized our dreams. Thus we may have followed their principles of democratic-centralism, meaning in theory that we should all participate in our arguments but finally follow in the fierce unity of our majority decision. And we also believed that our arguments were necessary to our collective struggle, that each group was pursuing a line of thinking that would eventually be proven or disproven in practice, that at the end of our struggle, we would finally unite in common unity. Our struggles would make us stronger, more powerful. But we were young and inexperienced, and our fighting was very real, our ideas held just under the tender surface of our new skin and flared in our nostrils. We wanted to be right. We wanted to win.
After we had worked together for our beliefs in twenty-four-hour days without rest, bonded ourselves to each other through the inner struggles of self-criticism within our groups, confessed our social sins to our brother- and sisterhoods and lost our individual selves to our collective purpose, we finally could only be with each other. And we found ourselves fighting about if we should collude with the so-called system and its elected liberal officials, if our struggle should be defined as working with the working class or our oppressed Asian communities, if this or that hotel tenant was an advanced worker, if gay lib protestors were bourgeois degenerates, if our loyalties were with the PRC or the USSR, if any of us were reformists, revisionists, or sellouts, if our art and writing must always have political purpose, and we were very sure that depending on our correct analysis of these definitions, we could then make decisions to act that would be ultimately unbeatable. But however we may have accounted for our thinking and our actions in these years, this was how we fought and spent our youth.
On the weekend after the fall of the I-Hotel, after we had all spent that long night into the morning hours locked in combat against the police, we regrouped before the hotel that had been our home, the center of our radical movement. Though physically exhausted and spent emotionally, we returned dutifully to our posts, returned to pick up the pieces and to continue the fight. We would not give up.
One of our groups had rented a truck with loudspeakers and parked it across the street from the boarded-up hotel, now surrounded by a small
600
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
contingent of police guarding its entrance. A member of the WMS stood before the microphone and began to speak, but a member from the IWK suddenly jumped on the truck and grabbed the microphone away, at which members of the WMS defended the possession of the microphone. And that was the beginning of our melee, every group jumping onto the truck to fight the others. An alphabet soup of punching youth, kicking and pushing, beating out the long years, months, and days of our frustrations, strangling the deep disappointment of our failure, finally spilling the blood we could not in nonviolent civil disobedience. The police across the street who now guarded our four doors pointed at our stupid battle and laughed. But we continued to fight, our humiliation pounding away, erasing our young years, our awakening minds, our innocent smiles.
I HOTEL
601