1: And this will conclude our transmission from the International Hotel
By the time we attached our destinies to the I-Hotel, it was an International Hotel in its third incarnation, the first hotel built before the Civil War in 1854, the second built after in 1873, and our building, rebuilt after the great earthquake in 1906. Our I-Hotel was as old as, although in some cases younger than, its tenants, and though we had repainted, re-plastered, and remortared all or significant sections of our aging home, we knew from crawling into all its secret places, the fragile locations of its deteriorating infrastructure, the rusting plumbing, bursting with sewage and flooding our basements, the need for vigilant inspections of electrical wiring and gas piping. We patched. We repaired. We renewed and celebrated. We pumped the old place with new blood and spirit, and the stubborn structure took its vitamins, wore our new cloak of banners and fiercely colored murals, brandished a renewed position of power, became a fortress and a beacon.
I HOTEL
579
Who's to say why walking into an old forgotten building could have the strange effect of swallowing our minds and electrifying talents we never knew we had? From the windows of the hotel, we could see Mr. Chang arriving from across the bay by bus, walking from Chinatown with an array of portable cassette recorders, as many as four strapped across his shoulders and chest like an armed Mexican bandit, pressing the recorders' keyboards and speaking into external microphones. We wondered where we had met or known Mr. Chang, but we all thought we had, as if in deja vu we recognized his diminutive figure slipping away into crowds. Wasn't he always there, the Chinese man with the tape recorder, placing his equipment near the pedestal or on the platform beneath the feet of Mario Savio or Bobby Seale or Warren Furutani? Hadn't we all seen him and forgotten his presence at that rally, that march, that public meeting, that protest?
Now we saw Mr. Chang parking his blue Civic hatchback loaded with cabling and recording equipment, and over a period of two years before that fated day in August 1977, we followed Mr. Chang into the hotel as he orchestrated our many hands into skillful technicians, wiring every inch of the International Hotel, passing our cables down and around its dark corridors, between walls and floors, in and out of rooms, from the basement to the roof. We mapped that brick structure with a complex nervous system of cabling that led to amplifiers, loudspeakers, IFB connectors, multiple microphones, recorders, transmitters, and a master control in a hidden broom closet on the last floor. And this system responded to our reporting voices, communicating our information to every location inside and outside, our message sent through hotel and street corridors, transmitted from our roof in pirated waves and retransmitted from a 304-foot tower overlooking the hills of Oakland. If our intention had been to blow up the building, we might have caused it to implode and fall in on itself, sucked into its eventual hole. Instead, our wiring caused a great explosion of live sound, our voices and our protest resonating and rippling in waves into the far reaches of the City, across the Bay and through its fingered peninsulas. And the center of our great uproar was a gigantic organic voice box of our own making; it was our I-Hotel.
Mr. Chang loved all the possibilities of recording live sound, the miracle of embedding events into the rolling filaments of plastic tape, but his preference was for the cheaper simplicity of sound. Others of us became
attached to the way the same plastic tape could embed images, learned the workings of F-stops on thirty-five-millimeter cameras or the stops on new-fangled video port-a-pack cameras, the strong shoulder and steady arm required to pan an event, the necessary zoom to catch intimate human details, the agility of the chase, the danger of shooting and being in the line of shooting. We may have noticed a young woman, deftly moving in time to the crowds, as if her body was always riding the crest of a wave and her eye constantly seeing the world through its recording lens. And similarly, we thought we recognized Judy Eng's figure as if by deja vu. Hadn't she always been at every significant press conference and event concerning the I-Hotel? Even though we might not have recognized her face hidden behind a camera, wasn't her body always in the middle of every eventual fracas, documenting the truth? Even as our eyes followed with significant attention the manong's story or the politician's lie against the backdrop of our beloved hotel, had we not pulled back to see the larger picture itself, of those of us who recorded the recording?
If we, the audiophiles and filmophiles seeking to be powerful through every new innovation in our adopted fields, had wired the I-Hotel to hear and see, how then would it speak? But of course we knew our voices, like our eyes and ears, to be many and multiple at any one time, but on the night of August 3,1977, and into the following morning, our voices sounded as one voice, and the I-Hotel spoke, and, although for the last time, spoke loudly.
Arthur Ma arrived in a fishing vest stuffed with extra microphones, additional battery packs, and electronic paraphernalia, and so the evening began, Arthur and his Third World Newsroom crew, attached to Mr. Chang's intricate sound system, recording and transmitting every moment from every location inside and outside, over and underneath the I-Hotel. Though we immediately recognized the cadenced voice of Arthur Ma, most of us did not know his face or physical person. Arthur Ma was a familiar and unmistakable radio voice, but tonight, he would be our voice. And from ten p.m., when the red alert was sounded, calling the people to save the I-Hotel, Arthur Ma, followed recklessly everywhere by Judy Eng and perhaps a half-dozen other cameras, described every event that we could possibly see or feel for the next ten hours.
"We have received calls to the hotel warning us that police are gathering in large numbers at the Civic Center."
580
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
581
"We just got word that the Bay Bridge has been closed to traffic to prevent East Bay folks from crossing to bring us assistance."
"It's now eleven p.m. and folks are beginning to pour into Kearny Street."
"We've learned that the police assault was scheduled for twelve thirty a.m., but it's now one in the morning, and we estimate about two thousand supporters are outside on the street."
"Medical personnel who should be inside the hotel assisting tenants, please proceed to your stations. We will be initiating a lockdown of the hotel in the next five minutes."
"The police are arriving!"
"Legal support teams and floor and hall monitors, please take your positions."
"Members of the press who will be covering events inside the building, this is your last call."
"They're coming! They're coming!"
"Protest leaders, please take your positions. Everyone, hold tight."
STOP THE EVICTION! WE WON'T MOVE!
STOP THE EVICTION! WE WON'T MOVE!
"It looks like there are about 250 police in riot gear. They've got several paddy wagons at the rear of their contingent as well as ambulances."
"They've blocked off Kearny Street on both ends. Access to Kearny has been completely closed."
JUST LIKE A TREE STANDING BY THE WATER, WE SHALL NOT BE MOVED. WE SHALL NOT BE MOVED.
"Two buses have just arrived, filled with the sheriff's deputies." "Our human barricade is at least twelve rows deep. Our arms are linked, and we are standing ready."
THE PEOPLE UNITED WILL NEVER BE DEFEATED! THE PEOPLE UNITED WILL NEVER BE DEFEATED!
"The assault by the police has begun. Police are forming themselves into a wedge and trying to shove their way to the entrance. Our human barricade is holding strong."
"The police are returning in a second wedge. They are attacking our people with their clubs! Trying to rip us away, prodding and punching us with their sticks!"
"Despite their sticks, our people are holding tight."
"The foot police are backing off. But now about a dozen police on horseback are moving forward. They're pressing their horses into our people, swinging their clubs and hitting folks!"
"We just saw a woman take her bare fist and punch a horse in the nose!"
"From their positions on horseback, the police don't seem to have much leverage with their clubs."
"But the horses are frightening. Their bodies are huge, and the police are forcing the animals into our human barricade. Their large hooves are falling into our people! We can see their panic and horror, grimacing pain."
HANG IN THERE! HOLD STRONG! WE'RE BEHIND YOU!
"The police seem to be retreating momentarily. Despite everything, the human barricade is relinking arm in arm and remains firm. We are set in our determination to stop this eviction."
STOP THE EVICTION! WE WON'T MOVE!
STOP THE EVICTION! WE WON'T MOVE!
"Here they come again! This time they are really beating folks on the head and in the stomach!"
"People are getting hurt! A woman has fallen to the ground! A man's face is covered in blood! More bloodied faces! This is turning ugly! We need medical support!"
"Members of our defense leadership request that demonstrators disperse."
EVERYONE PLEASE DISPERSE! PLEASE TAKE YOUR POSITIONS ON THE OPPOSITE SIDE OF THE STREET!
"We've agreed on nonviolent resistance. Our leadership insists that we've got to draw the line between defending the building and allowing the tenants to be hurt."
"If the police resort to tear gas to disperse the protestors, that could be deadly to the elderly tenants inside the hotel."     "There will be no bloodbath!"
DEMONSTRATORS ARE ASKED TO MOVE AWAY FROM THE HOTEL ENTRANCE.
WE WON'T MOVE!
WE WON'T MOVE!
582
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
I HOTEL
583
"As we can hear, there's stubborn resistance to the order to move. Many believe we can hold out until sunrise when the rest of the city wakes up. They're hanging tight."
"They're telling us to move, but there's no place to move to. We're completely trapped. Police are on every side!"
"It's 3:15 a.m., and the fire department has arrived with fire trucks."
"Police are climbing the truck ladder to the roof of the hotel. Protestors on the roof are trying to throw off the ladder from the roof!"
"Now they've got a truck with a telescoping light. The entire street and hotel are lit up like daylight. The light is blinding!"
"We can see clearly that there are about twenty tenants and supporters on the roof blocking the stairwell down into the hotel. Police are attacking and handcuffing each protestor."
"We have word that the police have sealed off the back of the hotel with three foot patrols."
"Now police are scaling the ladder to a third-floor window. They're breaking the glass and entering a room! We're told it's tenant Joe Bun-gayan's room. The glass to his room is shattering!"
"It's four thirty a.m., and the police have breached our human barricade. They are battering down the front entrance, pulling apart the plywood and two-by-fours used to secure the doors. Everything is splintering! They're destroying the doors!"
"Inside we've prepared another barricade using mattresses and tables. This should slow their progress into the hotel. We estimate another hundred protesters inside the hotel sitting in the corridors, blocking the way to tenants' rooms."
"The police are also taking sledgehammers to the storefronts. They're banging on the doors of the Kearny Street Workshop and the Chinese Progressive Association."
"We just got word that the police crashed through an adjacent hotel wall and are dragging out members of the CPA through the rubble."
"The last storefront, the Asian Community Center, seems to be impenetrable. The police keep at the door with their axes and sledgehammers, but it won't give! They must have put up a steel wall!"
"We're radioing in to the ACC telling them to open the door. We've learned that the doors are supported by sixteen-foot two-by-fours
584
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
wedged from the doors to the opposite wall. We're requesting that ACC members give themselves up. We don't want to give the police any more excuses to use violence."
"The Sheriff's deputies have been called to enter the hotel and evict the residents. The police are standing on guard in the front."
"Two busloads of deputies, about sixty men in riot gear, are positioning themselves in front of the hotel."
WHERE WILL YOU LIVE WHEN YOU GET OLD? WHERE WILL YOU LIVE WHEN YOU GET OLD?
"We've got at least fifty supporters sitting on the landing blocking the second floor to the tenants' rooms."
WE WON'T MOVE! WE WON'T MOVE!
"The deputies have spotted the president of our hotel tenants' association, and they're trying to pull him out of the crowd. They've got him in a chokehold. Our people around him are trying to hold him down. The deputies are pulling at him. They're hurting him. They're choking him. He's fighting back, holding on. They're twisting his legs. They've got him! Three deputies are dragging him away."
"There's stubborn resistance here. It's taking at least two or three deputies to pull each protestor out. One by one they're removing us from the hotel."
"Protestors are being removed from the hotel and dumped on the street on the other side of the police barricades."
"The Sheriff himself is now entering the hotel. He's got a sledgehammer, and he's bashing one of the tenant's doors. It's splintering under the force of his battering ram. Someone is crying inside. Other deputies are proceeding to other rooms and following his example."
"It's six a.m., and the first tenant is leaving his room, accompanied by his medical team."
"He's a long-time tenant of the hotel. He's in a state of shock. He's being guided out the hotel entrance. He's raising his arm to shield his eyes from the blinding spotlights. Folks are applauding and cheering him."
LONG LIVE! LONG LIVE!
"Another elderly tenant is leaving the hotel. He's glaring defiantly at the police. He's yelling something at them. He's cussing them out!"
I HOTEL
585
"The tenants are now being escorted out. One by one they are being forced to leave their home. Some of these tenants have lived here for over fifty years."
LONG LIVE! LONG LIVE!
"Our people outside are cheering, but the tenants are in a state of shock."
"This tenant's face is awash with tears. This is a heartbreaking scene."
"The tenants are leaving with nothing. No baggage. No belongings except what's on their bodies. They haven't been given any time to collect their things. Not even a blanket."
"One old tenant is collapsing. He's collapsing! We need medical assistance for this man. This is urgent! The strain of the eviction has been too much."
"We're laying him down on the sidewalk on top of an old banner. We've ripped down a second banner to serve as a blanket. The banner says in Chinese characters, Liberate the I-Hotel!"
"The last tenant is being escorted from the hotel. He wants to make a    statement."
I am crippled, and I am deaf, and I am very old. I am alone here, and they put me in the street. I want freedom, the principle of American democracy in the richest country in the world. Do you think our mayor has a place for me? No. No. Because I was happy here.
"Although the mayor promised to provide housing for the tenants after their eviction, there is no one here offering housing to anyone. There are no promised buses or housing assistance."
"A contingent of tenants can be seen walking away down Kearny. They have no place to go. Where will these suddenly homeless people go?"
"It is eight a.m., and the Sheriff has handed over the I-Hotel to the Enchanted Seas Investment Corporation."
SHAME! SHAME! SHAME!
"Nine hardhats from the Giant Debris Box and Wrecking Company have arrived with a truck of plywood. They are beginning to board up the hotel storefronts along Kearny Street.
"It's eight thirty a.m., and Pacific Gas & Electric has arrived to shut down electrical power and gas mains."
"The hotel has gone completely dark."
586
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
"And this will conclude our transmission from the International Hotel."
We saw the morning rise over our I-Hotel in a sea of rubbish: broken glass, splintered wood, horse shit, lost pieces of clothing and shoes, abandoned scarves, face masks and helmets, torn posters, paper flyers and shredded banners, blood and vomit. It's not known, but the very last person to emerge from our hotel was Mr. Chang. Hidden in our master control in the broom closet on the last floor, he continued to transmit our final sounds, the last weeping gurgles, and the long sigh of our dying hotel. Shut away in a dark closet for ten hours, Mr. Chang had seen and heard everything, and he had made it possible for us to also hear and see everything. When the single light bulb in his closet went dark, he pulled away the two-by-four that we'd fashioned across his closet door and unlatched the bolted lock. He packed up the equipment in two large suitcases and moved slowly through the debris of our hotel. Similarly, Judy Eng secured her lens cap and packed away her camera, and Arthur Ma wrapped his microphone in a soft piece of cloth and stuffed it into the deeper recesses of his fisherman's vest. We had seen and heard and experienced everything as it happened, believing that we were framing a vision of real events in real time, hearing and watching history happen, holding our machines up to the event with our hearts pounding in our fingers. And we all walked out and away, invisibly, firmly gripping our recording machines with their live, insinuating, and damning evidence, every moment engraved into plastic film.
And that was when the life of the I-Hotel was finally snuffed out—our hearing gone deaf, our seeing windows blinded, our fierce voice silenced.
I HOTEL
587