We were among the seventy-five or so patrons out and about in Chinatown on that Labor Day weekend. Of celebrating labor days, we knew very little. For us, it was just another laboring weekend.
We could not see but only imagine the two double-parked Plymouths, engines purring quietly outside on Washington, expectant, and the four young men, not even twenty years of age, who jumped from these cars hidden behind ski masks, one with a .45 semiautomatic, a second with a short barrel i2-gauge pump action shotgun, a third with a long barrel 12-gauge pump action shotgun, and a fourth with a silver-plated .38 revolver. It's said that the Joe Boys had come to settle tong business. Our old world had followed us into a new world, and yet we were saved because we understood the excited command in Cantonese: MAN WITH A GUN! And we dove instinctively beneath our tables. The deadly ammunition sprayed the innards of our Golden Dragon, leaving a fetter of broken glass, splintered dragon plaster, and torn human tissue, sputtering blood.
We ran down the back stairs, through the confusion of the greasy kitchen, and away through back alleys. We ran and ran. By the time we could hear the sirens of police cars, we were approaching our temporary beds. We would never be questioned, our presence on that morning never known. Invisible, we would slip into the clammy reek of our tiny rooms, rouse our counterparts from their sleep on our communal beds, push them off dutifully to their morning jobs, and fall into restless slumber in the rising heat pressed without intermission into damp mattresses.
604
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
6: August 3, 1577
In the final hours, we join this great gathering of human bodies, our bulwark of flesh surrounding an old brick hotel—materially worthless, symbolically invaluable, yet tonight still the Movement, fortified by passion and stubborn hope. See us collide and congregate, rally our puny human forces for the greater good. We've given our lives to this old place, but tonight we know our imminent failure, know that we may fall beneath its crumbling structure and with it, its crumbling memory. Public memory inscribed and archived as dates and naming. Secret memory withheld forever or revealed coyly, indiscreetly. Gossip. But as we tumble into the gravesite left by its demolition, perhaps our memory may flutter skyward, the City exploding and swirling away from our center—Manilatown, Chinatown, Japantown—spinning away with phallic impressions of Pyramid and Coit, spanning bridges of Wharf, Bay, and Golden Gate, dotted islands of Alcatraz and Angel, Victorians in soft undulating pastels, the rich green of Park and the endless blue of Bay, away and away and away. America. America.
And in time we may remember, collecting every little memory, all the bits and pieces, into a larger memory, rebuilding a great layered and labyrinthine, now imagined, international hotel of many rooms, the urban experiment of a homeless community built to house the needs of temporary lives. And for what? To resist death and dementia. To haunt a disappearing landscape. To forever embed this geography with our visions and voices. To kiss the past and you good-bye, leaving the indelible spit of our DNA on still moist lips. Sweet. Sour. Salty. Bitter.
I HOTEL
605