4: Do you speak English?
We have always arrived, they say, in waves, waves of yellow people splashed against American shores. A very few of us can say that we made the trip out of curiosity, but everyone else must probably admit that we've been forced across the Pacific, caught in the shifting consequences of war. That war might be violently active or violently passive, hot or cold, political or economic, but nevertheless, war. They've called us sojourners, immigrants, FOBS, refugees, exiles, even the brain drain, but we are all the ordinary or extraordinary veterans of cycle upon cycle of global conflict. In 1965, after the passage of new laws by the American Congress abolishing immigration quotas based on race and exempting family reunification from any quotas, word spread quickly. How many of us attached ourselves to our families and new possibilities, avenues of escape and prosperity in another world? Thus we surged forth, in a post-1965 wave multiplying our numbers tenfold from 20,000 to 264,000 every year. We were Chinese from Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia. We were Filipinos, Koreans, Thai, and Japanese. In another decade, our wave crested again higher, as we Vietnamese, Laotians, Cambodians, Hmong, Nepalese, Burmese, Indonesian also joined our distraught destinies to life across the Pacific. And in this same time period, the contours of Asia officially pushed southward so that we of the Indian peninsula, we Indian, Pakistani, Bangladeshi, also entered as Asian Americans.
Our waves landed us in scattered locations across the American nation where we recreated our memories of home in old and new ghettoed communities. How many thousands of us landed right here in the great City of San Francisco, merging our new lives with old lives, our new wave splashing against the last wave, encountering the familiar along with the odd stink of the anachronistic and yet the bravura of tired experience and sacrifice? Even though our families here made it possible for us to join them, their old wave did not really want the trouble of our new wave, did not want our neediness, our foreign dialects, our true stories. They did not want our troubled nightmares, the brutality of our
602
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
memories holding a serpentine grip around our daily actions, the cynicism and dishonesty of our survival strategies, or the fervor of our grasping capitalism. But neither we, nor they, could know this before we arrived, and here we were anyway.
Maybe we emerged late from our jobs that Wednesday night in August, making our way along Kearny or Jackson, and noticed the growing commotion on the streets. We had seen the signs in Chinese, read the headlines in the local papers, heard the strident voices speaking in Chinese from a loudspeaker on a moving truck calling us to protest injustice. We weren't strangers to protests and certainly not to injustice, but the problems of those old men in that old hotel seemed distant from our problems. Maybe we even knew this Samut Songkhram who, though Thai, was Chinese after all, heard stories about his powerful godfather's reach. Where we came from, it was not wise to fight such men. Maybe we felt a sincere connection to their plight but feared involvement, or maybe we shunned their politics. We may have hung around long enough to witness the American police plunging their horses into the people, whipping their sticks against so many soft faces, or even to see the final hours when the folks inside the hotel were carried out and thrown into the street one by one, but most likely we hurried away, fearing any chance of arrest or assault. We had come too far and sacrificed too much to risk such involvement.
However, exactly one month later, we found ourselves hanging out for a late-night snack only four blocks away from the International Hotel at the Golden Dragon on Washington. We were among the late-night customers, looking for a hot bowl of pork won ton or maybe a good seafood juk. We had worked the last shift, closing our own places, busing the last tables, or maybe we had seen the last showing of a Chinese opera, or lost a day's wages in a foolish gamble, and didn't feel like returning to a crowded room with snoring men or interrupting a quick tryst. Or maybe we were not drunk enough to sleep and still needed a beer and something to fill our bellies. The Golden Dragon was dependably open, even at two a.m. We could spot it by the lanterns, but the green and yellow dragon tile we could only imagine in the dark. Golden dragons wound around the columns and reflected from the mirrors behind which we sat inconspicuously, in corner booths in the loft above or on the ground floor.
I HOTEL
603
We were among the seventy-five or so patrons out and about in Chinatown on that Labor Day weekend. Of celebrating labor days, we knew very little. For us, it was just another laboring weekend.
We could not see but only imagine the two double-parked Plymouths, engines purring quietly outside on Washington, expectant, and the four young men, not even twenty years of age, who jumped from these cars hidden behind ski masks, one with a .45 semiautomatic, a second with a short barrel i2-gauge pump action shotgun, a third with a long barrel 12-gauge pump action shotgun, and a fourth with a silver-plated .38 revolver. It's said that the Joe Boys had come to settle tong business. Our old world had followed us into a new world, and yet we were saved because we understood the excited command in Cantonese: MAN WITH A GUN! And we dove instinctively beneath our tables. The deadly ammunition sprayed the innards of our Golden Dragon, leaving a fetter of broken glass, splintered dragon plaster, and torn human tissue, sputtering blood.
We ran down the back stairs, through the confusion of the greasy kitchen, and away through back alleys. We ran and ran. By the time we could hear the sirens of police cars, we were approaching our temporary beds. We would never be questioned, our presence on that morning never known. Invisible, we would slip into the clammy reek of our tiny rooms, rouse our counterparts from their sleep on our communal beds, push them off dutifully to their morning jobs, and fall into restless slumber in the rising heat pressed without intermission into damp mattresses.
604
KAREN TEI YAMASHITA
6: August 3, 1577
In the final hours, we join this great gathering of human bodies, our bulwark of flesh surrounding an old brick hotel—materially worthless, symbolically invaluable, yet tonight still the Movement, fortified by passion and stubborn hope. See us collide and congregate, rally our puny human forces for the greater good. We've given our lives to this old place, but tonight we know our imminent failure, know that we may fall beneath its crumbling structure and with it, its crumbling memory. Public memory inscribed and archived as dates and naming. Secret memory withheld forever or revealed coyly, indiscreetly. Gossip. But as we tumble into the gravesite left by its demolition, perhaps our memory may flutter skyward, the City exploding and swirling away from our center—Manilatown, Chinatown, Japantown—spinning away with phallic impressions of Pyramid and Coit, spanning bridges of Wharf, Bay, and Golden Gate, dotted islands of Alcatraz and Angel, Victorians in soft undulating pastels, the rich green of Park and the endless blue of Bay, away and away and away. America. America.
And in time we may remember, collecting every little memory, all the bits and pieces, into a larger memory, rebuilding a great layered and labyrinthine, now imagined, international hotel of many rooms, the urban experiment of a homeless community built to house the needs of temporary lives. And for what? To resist death and dementia. To haunt a disappearing landscape. To forever embed this geography with our visions and voices. To kiss the past and you good-bye, leaving the indelible spit of our DNA on still moist lips. Sweet. Sour. Salty. Bitter.
I HOTEL
605